   arXiv:2412.10044
Graphical Abstract
Data-Driven Quantification of Battery Degradation Modes via Crit-
ical Features from Charging
Yuanhao Cheng, Hanyu Bai, Yichen Liang, Xiaofan Cui, Weiran Jiang, Ziyou
Song
  Data-Driven Quantification of Battery Degradation
     Modes via Critical Features from Charging
Yuanhao Chenga , Hanyu Baia , Yichen Lianga , Xiaofan Cuib , Weiran Jiangc ,
                              Ziyou Songa,∗
            a
            Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of
                        Singapore, Singapore, 117575, Singapore
  b
    Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Los
                         Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
                c
                  Farasis Energy USA, Inc., Hayward, CA 94545, USA




Abstract
Battery degradation modes influence the aging behavior of Li-ion batteries,
leading to accelerated capacity loss and potential safety issues. Quantifying
these aging mechanisms poses challenges for both online and offline diagnostics
in charging station applications. Data-driven algorithms have emerged as
effective tools for addressing state-of-health issues by learning hard-to-model
electrochemical properties from data. This paper presents a data-driven
method for quantifying battery degradation modes. Ninety-one statistical
features are extracted from the incremental capacity curve derived from 1/3C
charging data. These features are then screened based on dispersion, contribu-
tion, and correlation. Subsequently, machine learning models, including four
baseline algorithms and a feedforward neural network, are used to estimate the
degradation modes. Experimental validation indicates that the feedforward
neural network outperforms the others, achieving a root mean square error of
around 10% across all three degradation modes (i.e., loss of lithium inventory,
loss of active material on the positive electrode, and loss of active material on
the negative electrode). The findings in this paper demonstrate the potential
of machine learning for diagnosing battery degradation modes in charging
station scenarios.

   ∗
    Corresponding author
    Email addresses: e1192594@u.nus.edu (Yuanhao Cheng), hanyuhanyu@u.nus.edu
(Hanyu Bai), yichen.liang@u.nus.edu (Yichen Liang), cuixf@seas.ucla.edu (Xiaofan
Cui), wjiang@farasis.com (Weiran Jiang), ziyou@nus.edu.sg (Ziyou Song)


Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                      December 16, 2024
Keywords: Battery degradation modes, Data-driven health monitor, Feature
engineering, Incremental capacity




                                   3
Abbreviations
   AF-FNN   All Feature Feedforward Neural Network
   AMAPE    Average of Mean Absolute Percentage Error
   ARMSE    Average of Root Mean Square Error
   CCD      Constant-Current-Discharge
   CF-FNN   Critical Feature Feedforward Neural Network
   DCD      Drive-Current-Discharge
   DM       Degradation Mode
   DV       Differential Voltage
   DVA      Differential Voltage Analysis
   EFC      Equivalent Full Cycle
   ENR      Elastic Net Regression
   Expt4    Experiment No.4
   Expt5    Experiment No.5
   FNN      Feedforward Neural Network
   ICA      Incremental Capacity Analysis
   IC       Incremental Capacity
   ICD      Differential IC Curve
   LAM      Loss of Active Material
   LAMne    Loss of Active Material in negative electrode
   LAMpe    Loss of Active Material in positive electrode
   LIB      Lithium-ion Battery
   LLI      Loss of Lithium Inventory
   MAPE     Mean Absolute Percentage Error
   MLR      Multiple Linear Regression
   OCV      Open Circuit Voltage
   OCP      Open Circuit Potential
   POCV     Pseudo Open Circuit Voltage
   POCP     Pseudo Open Circuit Potential
   RPT      Reference Performance Test
   RMSE     Root Mean Square Error
   RUL      Remaining Useful Life
   SGPR     Sparse Gaussian Progress Regression
   SOC      State of Charge
   SOH      State of Health
   SVR      Support Vector Regression



                                 4
1. Introduction
    The rapid development of lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) has reshaped the
global energy resources market in recent decades. A wide range of application
scenarios, from electric vehicles (EVs) to grid energy storage systems, benefit
from various types of LIBs to achieve specific demands like high power output
or large energy capacity [1]. However, the performance of LIBs diminishes
under varying working conditions over time. The state of health (SOH) is
a universally accepted metric used to assess the degree of battery aging.
Within the framework of SOH measurement, various degradation modes
(DMs) critically influence the battery’s health state and signify the tendency
towards the battery’s future degradation [2]. Extraction of battery DM
information could be critical in substantial applications [3].
    Numerous DMs have been extensively documented and analyzed in prior
studies. To capture material fading within a cell, DMs are categorized into
three main types: loss of lithium inventory (LLI), loss of active material on
the positive electrode (LAMpe), and loss of active material on the negative
electrode (LAMne) [4]. Within the past few years, there have been several
studies focusing on DM analysis. Incremental capacity analysis (ICA) and
differential voltage analysis (DVA) have been demonstrated as promising
tools for characterizing DMs across various electrode chemistries [5]. Dubarry
et al. developed a diagnostic and prognostic model for battery degrada-
tion simulation in 2012 [6]. Advanced data-driven methodologies have been
employed to analyze synthetic degradation data [7]. Yet most of these stud-
ies predominantly rely on simulated pseudo open circuit potential/voltage
(POCP/POCV) data. In reality, Obtaining OCV data is time-consuming
[8] although several methods have been developed to accelerate the OCV
extraction process [9, 10, 11]. Furthermore, field data is easier to obtain than
OCV data in real-world applications, yet little research replaces OCV data
with field data to analyze DMs online.
    The operating conditions in real-world applications significantly impact
the detection of DMs. [12]. The discharge process is inherently dynamic,
determined by user behavior, operational protocols, and time constraints.
This variability presents challenges for conventional ICA and DVA, which rely
on stable, quasi-open-circuit current flows. The slow charging process with a
single-stage current, on the other hand, typically follows a stable and constant
current charging procedure [13], making it a potentially reliable signal for
analyzing DMs. EVs charge protocol has been classified into different levels

                                       5
by the Society of Automatic Engineers [14]. Level-I and Level-II charging,
which restrict charging times to 4-12 hours and 2-6 hours respectively, are
classified as semi-fast charging. Conversely, Level-III charging is classified
as fast charging, offering charging times ranging from 1/5 to 1 hour [15].
Real-world stationary charging rates, which are higher than POCV current
flows, present distinct challenges for applying ICA to actual charging station
data. These challenges include: (1) Are traditional IC features, such as
specific IC peaks, still effective for analyzing DMs under real conditions? (2)
What types of features should be extracted from higher C-rate IC curves? (3)
How can the IC curve be effectively analyzed under non-POCV conditions?
     Most existing IC curve features for DM analysis are related to IC peaks [5].
Peak evolution, including position offset, value decline, and area shrinking,
can correspond to degradation occurrence. Quantification of these peak
behaviors presents degradation proportions of different battery components.
Relevant studies have been done on a large variety of battery chemistry
combinations, such as graphite intercalation compound/layered oxide-based
batteries, Spinel-based batteries, Iron phosphate-based batteries, and Lithium
titanate-based batteries [16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. IC peak-based feature analysis
begins with a specified degradation map, determined by the battery chemistry
under investigation. These degradation maps are generated as compilations of
synthetic curves representing POCV variations associated with single DM [6].
When analyzing DMs under non-POCV scenarios, the standard degradation
map potentially leads to inaccurate estimation results because the C-rate
impacts peak locations. Some peaks may overlap or shift in different paths
compared to the degradation map, and even disappear under charge station
protocol C-rate or deep degradation [21, 22, 23].
     The use of a statistical feature set may offer a more reliable approach for
analyzing battery degradation. Related features have been applied to the
battery SOH and remaining useful life (RUL) estimation. Features based
on current, voltage, and temperature curves and their integral curves could
be set as health indicators for battery energy storage systems [24]. Aging
features are extracted from these data sources and associated with statistics
principles, such as values of maximum, minimum, mean, and variance [25].
IC curves under different temperature ranges and differential IC curves (ICD)
could be informatics for feature excavation [26, 27]. A proper feature set after
filter pipeline [28] could be generated for a data-driven model including deep
learning models to train for SOH or RUL information prediction [29], such
as knee point prediction [30]. The partial charging curve contains practical

                                       6
features as well, expanding the potential of utilizing statistical features as
battery health monitor input[12].
    Therefore, this paper proposes a quantification framework for DM diagnosis
using critical IC features obtained from a real-world charging profile, and the
aging mechanism estimation performance of several data-driven algorithms
is assessed. The main contributions of this paper are summarized in three
points, including:

  1. Extend ICA data resource for DM diagnosis from POCV level to 1/3C
     real-world charging profile. Different cycle profiles with different IC
     shifting orientations are investigated.
  2. Several data-driven methods using statistical features calculated from
     the IC curve and its derivations are tested and compared for DM
     quantification.
  3. The substitutability of critical statistical IC features to IC peaks for
     DM quantification is discussed.

   The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 in-
troduces the experimental information of the work, including an overview of
the framework, dataset description, data processing, and feature extraction.
Afterward, several methodologies, including multi-step feature filter pipeline,
baseline algorithms, and feedforward neural network (FNN) are demonstrated
in Section 3. Section 4 focuses on the results and their discussion. The
conclusion is presented in in Section 5.

2. Dataset Insights
2.1. Overview
    The structure of this paper is shown in Fig. 1. First, the original database
selected from [31] is processed, which contains two parts, the reference per-
formance test (RPT) datasets and the aging datasets. The RPT datasets
contain 1/5C and 1/20C charge-discharge cycles and the galvanostatic inter-
mittent titration technique test. The aging datasets contain charging and
discharging signals based on designed protocols. Degradation labels, including
LLI, LAMpe, and LAMne values, are extracted from RPT datasets, and
aging datasets provide IC curves from cycling data. More data description
and processing details are described in Sections 2.2 and 2.3. Section 2.4
shows the extraction process of statistical IC feature sets, which are stored

                                       7
in the feature library. Critical features are chosen based on dispersion and
correlation because not all features in the feature library would contribute
to DM quantification. In this paper, "highly dynamic/active" means a high
level of dispersion, and "highly contributed" means a strong correlation. A
feature filter pipeline that consists of three different filter algorithms is used
to select critical features. The first filter is an absolute mean deviation filter,
which is used to verify the highly dynamic features. These features then pass
through the other two feature filters, namely the permutation importance
filter and the mutual information filter, to reserve the highly contributed
features. Section 3.1 introduces the principles and application details of
the feature filter pipeline. Critical features are selected by the feature filter
pipeline and used as the inputs of machine learning models to estimate DMs.
The performance of four baseline regression models, support vector regression
(SVR), sparse Gaussian progress regression (SGPR), multiple linear regression
(MLR), and elastic net regression (ENR), is compared with the FNN.




         Figure 1: Framework of the proposed data-driven DM quantification


2.2. Dataset Description
    In the original dataset, forty commercial 21700 lithium-ion cells with
NMC811 as cathode and C/SiOx as anode were tested in five experiments

                                        8
with different setups, which cover operation conditions with four different
state-of-charge (SOC) windows, 0-30%, 70–85%, 85–100%, and 0–100%,
respectively, and three different temperatures [10, 25, 40]◦ C for each SOC
window. The aging set is defined as a batch of cycles with a total throughput
equal to seventy-eight equivalent full cycles (EFCs). DM values are extracted
by RPT operated before and after every aging set. Each RPT contains a
1/10C fully charge-discharge cycle to calculate DM values [32]. Experiment
No.4 (Expt4) and Experiment No.5 (Expt5) are operated under the [0–100]%
SOC window with the same 1/3C charging process, which is assumed to satisfy
the semi-fast charge standard described in Section 1. The difference between
these two experiments is the discharge protocol, where Expt4 is under drive-
cycle-discharge (DCD) based on the Worldwide Harmonized Light Vehicle
Test Procedure [33], and Expt5 is under constant-current-discharge (CCD). In
this work, the DCD and the CCD datasets are selected for DM quantification
to investigate the characteristics of statistical features extracted from the
[0–100]% SOC window. Each dataset contains eight cells, which are allocated
evenly under different temperature windows, meaning three cells for 10◦ C,
two cells for 25◦ C, and three cells for 40◦ C. These cells are summarized in
Table 1.

2.3. Data Processing
    In the original dataset, DMs are calculated only from RPTs. Therefore, to
achieve the objective of DM quantification, cycle data in aging sets are labeled
with virtual DM values based on real values from RPT data. Assuming that
the DM values grow monotonically through cycling. Fig. 2 shows an example
of degradation labels from cell CCD_4. The label lists have several gaps
because the abnormal cycles with temperature control failure or electric signal
record errors are removed.
    Feature extraction is commonly done for time series data to extract
electrochemistry-related features, specifically for current, voltage, temperature,
and IC data [28]. Fig. 3 shows the voltage and the IC curves of cell CCD_4
as an example. The deep blue curve represents fresh cell data, and the light
blue curve represents aged cell data. Fig. 3(a) demonstrates that with an
identical charging current, the charging process reaches the upper voltage
threshold faster during cell aging. The IC curve is produced by differentiating
the voltage-versus-capacity curve into the dQ/dV-versus-voltage curve, which
carries electrochemical information of phase transition in peaks and valleys.
In previous studies, DM estimation using IC data focused on tracking IC

                                        9
    Test protocol          10◦ C                25◦ C                40◦ C
       CCD          CCD_1, CCD_2, CCD_3    CCD_4, CCD_5     CCD_6, CCD_7, CCD_8
       DCD          DCD_1, DCD_2, DCD_3    DCD_4, DCD_5     DCD_6, DCD_7, DCD_8


                        Table 1: Cells in CCD and DCD datasets




Figure 2: DM labels of cell CCD_4. (a) LLI, (b) LAMpe, (c) LAMne. The cross marks
in orange are real values from the RPT data, and the dots in blue are the interpolation
results.


peak locations, with noise filtering to ensure precise extraction. In this study,
IC peaks are not selected as features; instead, more statistical IC features
are explored despite the noises in the data. Hence, the original IC curve is
preferred for feature discovery. Fig. 3(b) and Fig. 3(c) compare IC curves
with and without smoothing. The smooth IC curve shows a lower peak
position at the last 10% of the charging process and fails to demonstrate the
disappearance of the final peak when the cell ages deeply. In the middle of the
IC curve (around 30% to 80% of the charging process), peak locations overlap
and disappear when severe degradation happens, making peak extraction
difficult. Therefore, the peak and valley locations are not used as features,
and the original IC curve is a more promising feature extraction resource
than the smooth IC curve considering low SOH circumstances.

2.4. Statistical Feature Extraction
    A feature library shown in Fig. 4 describes the generation of the statistical
features. In the first level, features are categorized into a temperature feature
set and an IC feature set considering data sources. In the second level, each set
concludes six statistical subsets, which are the basic, positive-negative-split,

                                          10
Figure 3: Information schematic of cell CCD_4. (a) voltage, (b) smoothed IC, (c) original
IC.




                                           11
Figure 4: The feature library is categorized into three levels: data source, data processing,
and data feature


cumulative-based, entropy-based, differences-based, and hybrid formation of
data sources. These subsets describe the transformations applied to data
resource curves. For example, IC’s basic statistical feature subset loads
features extracted from the IC curve. IC’s positive-negative-split statistical
feature subset carries features extracted from the positive and negative parts
of the IC curve separately. IC’s entropy-based statistical feature subset
contains features extracted from the entropy of the IC curve. Note that the
IC’s hybrid statistical features are generated from throughput multiplied
by other features. The third level contains specific parameters of features,
including maximum, minimum, mean, median, percentage values, etc.. After
calculations based on the three steps, ninety-one features are created in total.

3. Methodology
3.1. Multi-step Feature Filter Pipeline
    In this study, the critical features satisfy the following criteria: (1) they
have a high dispersion through battery aging, (2) they contribute to the
machine learning estimation process efficiently, and (3) they are highly corre-
lated to DMs. An adaptive multi-step feature filter pipeline with threshold
control is proposed to screen critical features. The pipeline consists of three
different filters with different functions. The first one is an absolute mean
deviation filter, which extracts the features with a high dispersion coefficient
through test cycles. The second filter is the permutation importance filter. It
evaluates feature contribution to DM estimation generated by the extreme
gradient boost (XGB), a decision tree-based algorithm. The final filter is the


                                            12
mutual information filter, which identifies features with a high correlation
coefficient with estimation results.

3.1.1. Absolute Mean Deviation Filter
    In feature engineering, the absolute mean deviation value reflects the
dispersion coefficient of a feature. A feature potentially shares an essential
correlation with the estimation target if the feature’s dispersion coefficient is
high. On the contrary, small dispersion represents that the feature’s values
rarely change during battery aging and contain less useful information, which
misleads model training and increases computation complexity. Thus, an
absolute mean deviation filter is introduced to screen out these features from
the feature library and reserve the features with high dispersion for later
analysis. The determination of "high dispersion" is impacted by feature
magnitudes, which cover a wide range of values. Therefore, before operating
the feature filter pipeline, the feature library is normalized by using min-max
normalization, which is shown in Eq 1. xmin and xmax mean the minimum
and maximum value of a feature, respectively. The normalized feature values
are in a range between 0 and 1 based on percentile. Hence, the absolute mean
deviation calculation would not be affected by magnitude differences. The
absolute mean deviation equation is shown in Eq 2. µ represents the mean
value of a normalized feature, and n is the number of values in the feature.
Considering the following feature extraction demand, a relatively conservative
screening ratio is decided to reserve the high dispersion features. After the
first filter, sixty-three features out of ninety-one total features are submitted
to the following filters for correlation coefficient analysis.
                                            x − xmin
                           xnormalized =                                     (1)
                                           xmax − xmin
                                           n
                                     1X
                            xAMD =         |xi − µ|                          (2)
                                     n i=1

3.1.2. Permutation Importance Filter
    To determine the eventual critical feature group after the high-dynamic
feature pool is confirmed, the contribution to data-driven algorithms of
the remaining characteristics should be evaluated from the importance and
correlation perspectives. A practical principle is to disturb the correlation
between the original prediction input and output and assess training results.


                                       13
Null importance, one of the methods based on the random search concept, has
been proven to be a promising tool for achieving feature weight assessment
for SOH estimation by Zhao et al. [25]. In their work, a gradient boosting
machine called LightGBM is picked as a null importance calculator. Initially,
the benchmark score is calculated by training with the feature set and the
label set in the correct pair. Afterward, label elements are randomly disrupted,
and the model is trained again. Here, the importance score is used to describe
how a feature correlates with the label. Suppose the feature has a strong
correlation with the label. In that case, its importance score drops after the
model is trained with the disrupted label as the feature is unable to contribute
to prediction. On the other hand, the importance score changes slightly
or increases if the feature has a weak correlation with the label. This test
procedure is repeated multiple times to ensure the scoring comparison result
is robust. The final feature score is evaluated by importance split and gain
corresponding to the label benchmark result and label disruption iteration
results.
     In this work, XGB is employed as the computational method. Compared
to LightGBM, XGB consumes relatively more memory and time on massive
data resources. However, the entire dataset contains only sixteen cells with
around 10000 cycles, and each cycle contains a high-dynamic feature subset
with a size of sixty-three. The dataset is relatively small, resulting in negligible
differences in computational resource consumption between the two potential
evaluation methods. Because XGB could achieve higher prediction accuracy
by using pre-sorted and exact algorithms, XGB instead of LightGBM is
selected. Compared to the null importance filter, the permutation importance
filter directly evaluates feature significance by perturbing elements within
specific subsets and measuring the subsequent impact on estimation accuracy.
This procedure is repeated 100 times for each subset across all degradation
label sets, using the mean score to assess each feature. Critical features
significantly impact accuracy upon disturbance, resulting in high scores, while
non-contributory features produce minimal changes and low scores. Unlike
the null importance analysis, the permutation importance filter provides a
straightforward assessment by requiring only one training session per DM
label set and simplifying feature importance to a single-dimensional value
per feature, making it an easily interpretable algorithm. Therefore, the
permutation importance filter is applied.
     In the previous absolute mean deviation filter, the standard deviation of
IC curve IC_standard_deviation and the skewness of IC curve IC_skewness

                                        14
earn high ranking. Further permutation importance assessment points out
that IC_standard_deviation and IC_skewness rank at the top, which con-
tinuously increases their possibility of contributing to DM quantification.
On the contrary, fourteen out of sixteen of the features extracted from the
IC cumulation curve are high-dynamic features, but only two of them earn
higher scores than average in the permutation importance filter. Based on
the above analysis, IC_standard_deviation and IC_skewness are critical
features for LLI estimation, while IC-cumulation-based features are still under
observation.

3.1.3. Mutual Information Filter
     In the previous section, the permutation importance filter selected the high-
contributing features for machine learning from the high-dynamic features.
To ensure the final feature set’s reliability, correlation analysis should be
conducted to confirm that high-correlating features are not missed. Several
correlation analysis methods, including Pearson correlation analysis and
Spearman correlation analysis, have been proven to be practical in literature.
These two tools focus on digging into different sorts of correlating relationships.
Pearson correlation analysis measures the linear correlation between two
continuous variables, while Spearman measures the monotonic correlation
between two ordinal or continuous variables.
     In this study, the degradation label set refers to three dimensions, which
are LLI, LAMpe, and LAMne. Feature correlations with each other and with
DMs could be complicated, and DMs share correlations among themselves as
well. Therefore, to tackle the three-dimensional challenge, mutual information
analysis is introduced as the correlation filter. Developed from information
theory, mutual information calculates the information quantity that a variable
shares with another variable. It captures all sorts of correlations, including
linear, non-linear, monotonic, and non-monotonic. The measurement is based
on the probability distributions of the variables involved, where a higher
mutual information value indicates a stronger correlation and more shared
information between variables.
     Unlike Pearson and Spearman, which take values from -1 to 1, the depth
of mutual information degree is non-negative. The mutual information score
is zero if the two variables share no information. The higher the scoring,
the deeper the correlation between the analysis targets. This characteristic
is similar to permutation importance. Therefore, the mutual information
filter and permutation importance filter are evaluated under the identical

                                        15
rule, which is the feature score ranking and further algorithm performance.
In the proposed method, since two second-step filters work in parallel, any
feature passing either filter is considered a critical feature. The pool consists
of fixed features and high-dynamic features that are either highly contributing
or highly correlated. High-dynamic features that meet both criteria are also
selected. For instance, in the IC-cumulation-based feature subset, while most
elements fall below the permutation importance threshold, some rank highly
based on mutual information. This includes metrics like mean, max value,
90th percentile, kurtosis, and median of the cumulative IC curve. However,
IC_standard_deviation and IC_skewness show lower mutual information
shared with LLI while ranking highly in permutation importance. Therefore,
they are determined as critical features. On the contrary, the throughput
of IC curve IC_thp earns low scores from both second-step filters, which
indicates that it is a low-contributing and low-correlating feature. Thus,
IC_thp is not on the list of critical features.
     Critical features for each DM are extracted using the feature filter pipeline.
Once extracted, these critical features are combined into a unified set of
critical features for all DMs. In total, twenty-one IC features are selected as
the final critical features.

3.2. Data-driven Estimation Models
    In the feature engineering process, the integral feature filter pipeline
identified the critical features. The next step is to quantify battery DM
using data-driven methods, including four baseline algorithms and an FNN.
The baseline algorithms are SVR, SGPR, MLR, and ENR, respectively.
SVR applies the principles of support vector machine to regression [34],
aiming to fit errors within a specific threshold while being robust against
outliers, making it a potentially efficient tool to model the relationship
between features and degradation labels. SGPR optimizes Gaussian process
methods by using a subset of data points, termed inducing points, to reduce
computational demands significantly and accelerate the calculation process.
The MLR establishes relationships between multiple independent variables
and a dependent variable, using a linear equation fitted to the data to predict
outcomes. Both SGPR and MLR are fast, but MLR is simpler. ENR combines
the L1 and L2 penalties from lasso and ridge methods and is ideal for handling
correlated features and balancing variable selection with model complexity.
    These regression methods are designed to estimate values in a single
dimension, meaning each of the three degradation label subsets must be

                                        16
estimated separately. However, DMs interact in complex ways, leading to
overlapping electrical signals. Different combinations of DM values can exhibit
similar or even identical behavior on the IC curve, potentially confusing
regression model training. Therefore, an FNN is designed to estimate all
three DMs at the same time. The network’s output is three-dimensional,
corresponding to the values of LLI, LAMpe, and LAMne. A loss function,
defined by Eq 3, is designed to improve accuracy for each DM. The w
represents penalty weights applied on DMs, and 1, 4, and 2 are assigned for
LLI, LAMpe, and LAMne, respectively. The network architecture consists
of five embedding layers and five prediction layers connected through fully
connected layers.

       Training loss = RM SELLI · wLLI + RM SELAMpe · wLAMpe + RM SELAMne · wLAMne   (3)



4. Results and Discussions
    After feature engineering for critical feature selection, the quantification of
battery DM is obtained by data-driven methods. The results are demonstrated
from the following perspectives: performance of the four baseline models is
first evaluated and ranked; the baseline model with the best performance is
chosen as the representative regression model to compare with the FNN model;
then, another test of performance with and without feature engineering is
set to evaluate the efficiency of the feature filter pipeline and validate the
critical features. Two error metrics, RMSE and mean absolute percentage
error (MAPE), are used to determine estimation accuracy.
    Due to the limitation of data, a statistical performance test series shown
in Fig. 5 is designed to assess all the models applied in this work[35, 36].
The test series includes six tests with three cells per test. Both protocols,
all three temperature conditions, and most cells are contained to ensure
comprehensive test coverage. The average of MAPE (AMAPE), the average
of RMSE (ARMSE), and the standard deviation of MAPE and RMSE from
the six test combinations are calculated and given in Table 2 and Table 3.

4.1. DM Quantification Performance
4.1.1. Performance of Baseline Models
    A statistical significance t-test is applied to compare the performance
of baseline models. In this work, the null hypothesis assumes that the
performance of SVR is similar to the other baseline models, while the alternate

                                           17
Figure 5: Summary of the test cells. The blue, green, and red cells represent 10◦ C, 25◦ C,
and 40◦ C, respectively. Test cells are selected from both protocols and all temperature
conditions.




                  Model         LLI[%]       LAMpe[%]        LAMne[%]
                  SVR   9.98/1.91            15.53/4.38      13.92/3.52
                 SGPR  11.51/1.36            17.17/3.11      17.67/4.44
                 MLR   12.73/1.87            18.87/2.15      20.40/4.62
                  ENR  17.28/3.50            23.46/2.33      23.03/4.98
                CF-FNN 5.63/1.06             10.79/0.81       8.43/0.29
                AF-FNN 13.40/2.95            21.90/3.06      13.60/2.75

Table 2: Summary of model MAPE. For each result, the first number represents AMAPE
and the second number represents the standard deviation of MAPE through the six tests.
CF-FNN represents FNN using critical features, and AF-FNN represents FNN using all
features.



                                           18
                  Model       LLI[%]      LAMpe[%]       LAMne[%]
                  SVR  1.00/0.24           1.18/0.30     1.47/0.36
                 SGPR  1.01/0.26           1.09/0.34     1.66/0.36
                 MLR   1.11/0.12           1.16/0.29     2.01/0.29
                  ENR  1.68/0.30           1.13/0.13     2.06/0.42
                CF-FNN 0.59/0.11           0.71/0.07     1.78/0.21
                AF-FNN 2.18/1.27           3.54/3.14     4.18/3.48

Table 3: Summary of model RMSE. For each result, the first number represents ARMSE
and the second number represents the standard deviation of RMSE through the six tests.
CF-FNN represents FNN using critical features, and AF-FNN represents FNN using all
features.


hypothesis assumes that SVR performs better. The significance level is set as
5%. The calculation of the t-value and degrees of freedom are given in Eq 4
and Eq 5, where x̄Model represents AMAPE of the model under comparison,
x̄SVR represents AMAPE of SVR, sModel represents the standard deviation
of MAPE of the model under comparison, and sSVR represents the standard
deviation of the MAPE of SVR.
    The t-test results are shown in Table 4. Based on the significance level and
the t-distribution table, the tthreshold is 2.145. Since SVR is the benchmark in
the hypotheses, its t-values are zeros. For LAMpe estimation, both SGPR
and MLR have t-values below the tthreshold . However, for the total t-value,
only SGPR meets the null hypothesis, indicating that SGPR and SVR are
comparable. MLR and ENR have total t-values higher than the tthreshold ,
suggesting that SVR outperforms both MLR and ENR.
                                   x̄Model − x̄SVR
                                t= q 2                                            (4)
                                      sModel   s2SVR
                                        6
                                             +    6

                        df = n + n − 2 = 6 + 6 − 2 = 10                           (5)
   The MAPE distribution of the four regression models is assessed and
shown in Fig. 6. LLI can be better estimated than LAMpe and LAMne based
on the lower average height of bars. The accuracy of SVR is more stable than
that of the other baseline models, showing fewer results exceeding 20% of
MAPE. This may be attributed to the adaptability of SVR in handling data
that encompasses both linear and non-linear components. The DMs increase

                                         19
                    Model       LLI     LAMpe       LAMne      Total
                     SVR   0               0           0         0
                    SGPR 1.598           0.748       1.621     1.322
                    MLR 2.520            1.677       2.733     2.310
                     ENR 4.485           3.915       3.659     4.020

Table 4: T-test values of baseline models. The total t-test score is the mean value of each
model’s t-values on the three DMs.


relatively linearly before severe degradation occurs. After approaching a knee
point, different DM may grow at different speeds depending on conditions,
leading to various non-linear changes.
    The LAMpe and LAMne estimation errors show greater variability com-
pared to LLI estimation errors, particularly as batteries approach their knee
points. The post-knee point accelerations, influenced by DM interactions,
present a complex dynamic that is challenging for regression models. These
models estimate each DM independently, without accounting for the beneficial
insights gained from considering the interactions between DMs. As illustrated
in Fig. 7, which shows the distribution boxplot of baseline model errors in test
1, the ranges of LAMne quantification errors are larger than the other two
DMs. This may be partly explained by the larger maximum value of LAMne
than that of the other two DMs. On the contrary, the LAMpe boxplot covers
a smaller area, which is partly correlated to the fact that LAMpe is smaller
than LAMne during the battery lifetime. Hence, it can be explained that the
MAPE of LAMpe quantification is the largest.
    Based on the t-test result and the error distribution map, SVR performs
the best among the baseline models, with AMAPE for LLI, LAMpe, and
LAMne being 9.98%, 15.53%, and 13.92%, and ARMSE being 1.00%, 1.18%,
and 1.47%, respectively.

4.1.2. Performance of FNN
    In the previous section, four regression models advantageous in single
target estimation are applied to quantify DMs. These models are operated
to estimate DMs one by one. For example, an SVR model is trained for
LLI quantification. After the training and testing results are generated,
another SVR model is trained for LAMpe or LAMne quantification. Each
baseline model is trained three times to estimate the three labels separately.


                                            20
Figure 6: MAPE of Baseline models. Each bar represents the MAPE of a test. Columns
from left to right are the MAPE of SVR, SGPR, MLR, and ENR, respectively. Rows from
upside to downside are the MAPE of LLI, LAMpe, and LAMne, respectively.




                                        21
Figure 7: Baseline error boxplot of test 1. (a), (b), and (c) are the results of LLI, LAMpe,
and LAMne, respectively. These enhanced box plots provide information on the distribution
of data by plotting quantiles. Each error dataset is split into 15 boxes. The height of each
box group represents the coverage of the estimation error space, and the area of each small
box in a box group represents the error ratio under each interval.


However, when a LIB is aging, DMs grow simultaneously and impact each
other. Quantifying DMs one by one may neglect the interaction among
battery interior electrochemical processes. To quantify DMs considering
mechanism-to-mechanism interaction, an FNN is developed with the final
output containing three objectives corresponding to LLI, LAMpe, and LAMne.
The MAPE of FNN is compared with the best baseline model SVR, as shown
in Fig. 8. The MAPE of FNN is generally lower than that of SVR, as
reflected in the smaller area shown in the radar maps. The structure of FNN,
with multiple fully connected layers and more adjustable parameters than
SVR, offers enhanced flexibility, making it well-suited for capturing complex
patterns in a larger dataset compared to the one applied in this work. The
AMAPE values of FNN are 5.63%, 10.79%, and 8.43% for LLI, LAMpe, and
LAMne, respectively, all of which are lower than those of SVR. This indicates
that FNN is more robust than SVR. In this study, the dataset is limited by
the number of cells, DM depths, and the range of conditions. Expanding
the dataset could enhance the performance of FNN. Furthermore, FNN is
more suited than SVR for this task, as it effectively handles the simultaneous
quantification of the three DMs.

4.2. Feature Filter Efficiency and Critical Feature Validation
    To evaluate the feature filter pipeline’s efficiency, an FNN model using all
features was trained for comparison. The MAPE comparison shown in Fig. 9

                                            22
Figure 8: MAPE comparison between FNN and SVR. (a), (b), and (c) are the results of
LLI, LAMpe, and LAMne, respectively. The blue area and the green area represent the
SVR estimation MAPE and the FNN estimation MAPE, respectively. The size of the area
is proportional to the MAPE value, larger areas correspond to higher MAPE.


indicates that the feature filter improves estimation accuracy. The FNN with
all features exhibits more dispersed estimations compared to the FNN using
critical features, particularly in early degradation stages. Specifically, before
LLI, LAMpe, and LAMne reach 5%, 2%, and 8%, respectively, the FNN with
all features generates significantly larger errors. After applying the feature
filter, both MAPE and RMSE are reduced across all three DMs.
     The critical IC features, summarized in Table 5, can be classified into
three categories: the IC-based features, the cumulative IC-based features, and
the other features. Fig. 10 shows two of the IC transformation formats: the
smooth IC curves and the cumulative IC curves. As illustrated in Table 5, most
of the critical features are extracted from the IC curves and the cumulative
IC curves, which illustrates that these two types of data may contain a more
informative correlation with battery degradation than other IC transformation
formats. Only one feature is extracted from the differential IC curves and
two from throughput calculated by the IC curves.
     In the IC-based critical feature category, six out of eight features are
percentile features and situated near the IC peaks and valleys. This illustrates
that IC percentile features can replace IC peaks and valleys in DM estimation.
As demonstrated in Fig. 10(a), the IC peaks shift and overlap when the
cycle number increases. When the highest IC peak falls below 4300 mAh per
volt, IC peaks in the 60% to 90% SOC area become indiscernible, potentially
leading to failures in IC peak extraction. On the contrary, the IC percentile
features correspond to certain locations on an entire IC curve. They are easy
to obtain and will not disappear after severe degradation. In the cumulative

                                        23
Figure 9: MAPE comparison between all feature FNN and critical feature FNN. (a), (b),
and (c) are the results of LLI, LAMpe, and LAMne, respectively. The orange area and the
green area represent the all-feature FNN estimation MAPE and the critical-feature FNN
estimation MAPE, respectively. The size of the area is proportional to the MAPE value,
larger areas correspond to higher MAPE.


IC-based critical feature category, the number of percentile features is three
(70%, 80%, and 90%), which is less than that in the IC-based critical feature
category. The cumulative IC curve is similar to the voltage-versus-capacity
curve in shape and characteristics. As shown in Fig. 10(b), the percentile
features in the lower SOC area change slightly while the ones in the higher
SOC area change more aggressively. This can be explained by the significant
capacity fade after a large number of cycles. In the meantime, several features,
including the maximum value and the range of value, are sensitive to capacity
fade as well. Therefore, these features are listed as critical features.

5. Conclusion
    This paper presents a data-driven approach to quantifying battery DMs
using critical IC features, validated with experimental data. A feature filter
pipeline is employed to identify the most relevant features. In the initial
performance test, four regression models are trained and compared for DM
quantification, followed by the development of an FNN model, which is
compared to the best regression model results. The FNN model using critical
IC features is further evaluated by training another FNN model with the full
feature set. The results demonstrate that statistical features derived from the
1/3C IC curve provide sufficient information for accurate DM estimation. The
proposed feature filter, based on information theory, enhances the accuracy of
degradation quantification while reducing computational load. In this study,


                                          24
            IC-based    Cumulative IC-based                 Other
              30%                 70%                IC_diff_90%
              40%                 80%                   IC_thp
              50%                 90%              IC_thp*pos(mean)
              70%                mean
              80%               median
              90%              std_dev
            std_dev               var
               var             kurtosis
                                  max
                                 range

                            Table 5: Critical IC features




Figure 10: IC curve transformation formats: (a) smooth IC curves, (b) cumulative IC
curves.



                                         25
SVR is the best regression model, with AMAPE of LLI, LAMpe, and LAMne
being 9.98%, 15.53%, and 13.92%, respectively. While SVR performs well
among the regression models, the multi-dimensional nature of the degradation
targets makes the FNN a more efficient and appropriate choice. Compared
to SVR, the AMAPE values of FNN are reduced to 5.63%, 10.79%, and
8.43% for LLI, LAMpe, and LAMne, respectively. This study establishes a
benchmark for battery DM quantification using data-driven methods and
introduces critical IC features for further exploration.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
    Yuanhao Cheng: Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology, Con-
ceptualization. Hanyu Bai: Writing – review & editing, Methodology,
Validation. Yichen Liang: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Val-
idation. Xiaofan Cui: Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Weiran
Jiang: Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Ziyou Song: Writing –
review & editing, Supervision.

Declaration of competing interest
   The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests
or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work
reported in this paper.




                                    26
References
[1] S. Nyamathulla and C. Dhanamjayulu. A review of battery energy
    storage systems and advanced battery management system for differ-
    ent applications: Challenges and recommendations. Journal of Energy
    Storage, 86:Article 111179, 2024.

[2] M. Dubarry, C. Truchot, B. Y. Liaw, K. Gering, S. Sazhin, D. Jamison,
    and C. Michelbacher. Evaluation of commercial li-ion cells based on
    composite electrode for plug-in evs. Journal of Power Sources, 196:10336–
    10343, 2011.

[3] M. Lucu, E. Martinez-Laserna, I. Gandiaga, and H. Camblong. A critical
    review on self-adaptive li-ion battery ageing models. Journal of Power
    Sources, 401:85–101, 2018.

[4] C. Birkl, M. Roberts, E. McTurk, P. Bruce, and D. Howey. Degradation
    diagnostics for lithium ion cells. Journal of Power Sources, 341:373–386,
    2016.

[5] M. Dubarry and D. Beck. Best practices for incremental capacity analysis.
    Frontiers in Energy Research, 10:Article 1023555, 2022.

[6] M. Dubarry, C. Truchot, and B. Y. Liaw. Synthesize battery degradation
    modes via a diagnostic and prognostic model. Journal of Power Sources,
    219:204–216, 2012.

[7] N. Costa, D. Anseán, M. Dubarry, and L. Sánchez. Icformer: A deep
    learning model for informed lithium-ion battery diagnosis and early knee
    detection. Journal of Power Sources, 592:Article 233910, 2024.

[8] Rui Xiong, Quanqing Yu, Le Yi Wang, et al. A novel method to obtain
    the open circuit voltage for the state of charge of lithium ion batteries in
    electric vehicles by using h infinity filter. Applied Energy, 207:346–353,
    2017.

[9] Shijie Tong, Matthew P. Klein, and Jae Wan Park. On-line optimization
    of battery open circuit voltage for improving state-of-charge and state-
    of-health estimation. Journal of Power Sources, 2015.



                                      27
[10] Chao Weng, Jiuchun Sun, and Huei Peng. A unified open-circuit-voltage
     model of lithium-ion batteries for state-of-charge estimation and state-
     of-health monitoring. Journal of Power Sources, 258:228–237, 2014.

[11] Y. Liu, C. T. Ke, L. Y. Yang, H. Liu, Y. L. Chen, and J. H. Yuan.
     State of charge estimation of lithium-ion batteries using the open-circuit
     voltage at various ambient temperatures. Journal of Power Sources,
     482:228975, 2021.

[12] X. Li, D. Yu, S. B. Vilsen, and D. I. Stroe. Accuracy comparison and
     improvement for state of health estimation of lithium-ion battery based
     on random partial recharges and feature engineering. Journal of Energy
     Chemistry, 92:591–604, 2024.

[13] M. R. Khalid, M. S. Alam, A. Sarwar, and M. S. J. Asghar. A com-
     prehensive review on electric vehicles charging infrastructures and their
     impacts on power-quality of the utility grid. eTransportation, 1:Article
     100006, 2019.

[14] SAE International. Sae electric vehicle and plug-in hybrid electric vehicle
     conductive charge coupler. SAE Standards, Jan 2010.

[15] W. Su, H. R. Eichi, W. Zeng, and M. Y. Chow. A survey on the
     electrification of transportation in a smart grid environment. IEEE
     Transactions on Industrial Electronics, 8:1–10, 2012.

[16] R. Carter, T. A. Kingston, R. W. Atkinson, M. Parmananda, M. Dubarry,
     C. Fear, P. P. Mukherjee, and C. T. Love. Directionality of thermal
     gradients in lithium-ion batteries dictates diverging degradation modes.
     Cell Reports Physical Science, 2:Article 100351, 2021.

[17] M. Dubarry, G. Baure, and A. Devie. Durability and reliability of
     ev batteries under electric utility grid operations: Path dependence of
     battery degradation. Energies, 13:2494, 2020.

[18] M. Dubarry, C. Truchot, B. Y. Liaw, K. Gering, S. Sazhin, D. Jamison,
     and C. Michelbacher. Evaluation of commercial lithium-ion cells based
     on composite positive electrode for plug-in hybrid electric vehicle appli-
     cations. part ii. degradation mechanism under 2c cycle aging. Journal of
     Power Sources, 196:10355–10368, 2011.


                                      28
[19] M. Dubarry and B. Y. Liaw. Identify capacity fading mechanism in a
     commercial lifepo4 cell. Journal of Power Sources, 194:541–549, 2009.

[20] G. Baure and M. Dubarry. Battery durability and reliability under
     electric utility grid operations: 20-year forecast under different grid
     applications. Journal of Energy Storage, 29:101391, 2020.

[21] G. Seo, J. Ha, M. Kim, J. Park, and J. Lee. Rapid determination of
     lithium-ion battery degradation: High c-rate lam and calculated limiting
     lli. Journal of Energy Chemistry, 67:663–671, 2022.

[22] Z. Wu, Y. Zhang, and H. Wang. Battery degradation diagnosis under
     normal usage without requiring regular calibration data. Journal of
     Power Sources, 608:234670, 2024.

[23] J. Schmitt, M. Rehm, A. Karger, and A. Jossen. Capacity and degrada-
     tion mode estimation for lithium-ion batteries based on partial charging
     curves at different current rates. Journal of Energy Storage, 59:106517,
     2023.

[24] A. K. Srivastava and P. Famouri. Battery energy storage systems: A
     review of energy management systems and health metrics. Energies,
     17:1250, 2024.

[25] B. Zhao, W. Zhang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, C. Zhang, and J. Zhang.
     Research on the remaining useful life prediction method for lithium-ion
     batteries by fusion of feature engineering and deep learning. Applied
     Energy, 358:122325, 2024.

[26] L. Yao, J. Wen, Y. Xiao, C. Zhang, Y. Shen, G. Cui, and D. Xiao. State
     of health estimation approach for li-ion batteries based on mechanism
     feature empowerment. Journal of Energy Storage, 84:110965, 2024.

[27] J. Wen, X. Chen, X. Li, and Y. Li. Soh prediction of lithium battery
     based on ic curve feature and bp neural network. Energy, 261:125234,
     2022.

[28] J. Wang, C. Zhang, L. Zhang, X. Su, W. Zhang, X. Li, and J. Du. A
     novel aging characteristics-based feature engineering for battery state of
     health estimation. Energy, 273:127169, 2023.


                                      29
[29] Y. Jiang, Y. Chen, F. Yang, and W. Peng. State of health estimation of
     lithium-ion battery with automatic feature extraction and self-attention
     learning mechanism. Journal of Power Sources, 556:232466, 2023.

[30] Jingcai Du and Caiping Zhang. Aging abnormality detection of lithium-
     ion batteries combining feature engineering and deep learning. Energy,
     297:131276, 2024.

[31] Niall Kirkaldy, Mohammad A. Samieian, Gregory J. Offer, Monica
     Marinescu, and Yatish Patel. Lithium-ion battery degradation: Com-
     prehensive cycle ageing data and analysis for commercial 21700 cells.
     Journal of Power Sources, May 2024.

[32] N. Kirkaldy, M. A. Samieian, G. J. Offer, M. Marinescu, and Y. Patel.
     Lithium-ion battery degradation: measuring rapid loss of active silicon
     in silicon-graphite composite electrodes. ACS Applied Energy Materials,
     5:13367–13376, 2022.

[33] A. Hales, E. Brouillet, Z. Wang, B. Edwards, M. A. Samieian, J. Kay,
     S. Mores, D. Auger, Y. Patel, and G. Offer. Isothermal temperature
     control for battery testing and battery model parameterization. SAE
     International Journal of Electrified Vehicles, 10:105–122, 2021.

[34] F.-K. Wang and T. Mamo. A hybrid model based on support vector re-
     gression and differential evolution for remaining useful lifetime prediction
     of lithium-ion batteries. Journal of Power Sources, 401:49–54, 2018.

[35] X. Cui, M.A. Khan, G. Pozzato, S. Singh, R. Sharma, and S. Onori. Tak-
     ing second-life batteries from exhausted to empowered using experiments,
     data analysis, and health estimation. Cell Reports Physical Science,
     5:101941, 2024.

[36] X. Cui, M. A. Khan, and S. Onori. Online adaptive data-driven state-of-
     health estimation for second-life batteries with bibo stability guarantees.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04734, 2024.




                                       30
