                                                                                                                              ll
                                                                                                                       OPEN ACCESS



Article
Increasing generalization capability of battery
health estimation using continual learning
                                                                                          Yunhong Che, Yusheng Zheng,
                                                                                          Simona Onori, Xiaosong Hu,
                                                                                          Remus Teodorescu

                                                                                          sonori@stanford.edu (S.O.)
                                                                                          xiaosonghu@ieee.org (X.H.)

                                                                                          Highlights
                                                                                          Improving model generalization
                                                                                          incrementally for battery health
                                                                                          estimation

                                                                                          Applicable under various working
                                                                                          conditions without catastrophic
                                                                                          forgetting

                                                                                          Model is interpretable with
                                                                                          unbiased feature distributions

                                                                                          Generate large aging datasets for
                                                                                          prismatic and pouch batteries




Che et al. demonstrate the approach and significance of using domain adaptative
continual learning to incrementally increase the generalization ability of battery
health estimation model. The model ensures estimations under various scenarios
related to practical applications for different batteries in their different lifetimes,
with interpretations of unbiased feature distributions and avoidance of
catastrophic forgetting.




                                                                                          Che et al., Cell Reports Physical Science 4,
                                                                                          101743
                                                                                          December 20, 2023 ª 2023 The Author(s).
                                                                                          https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2023.101743
                                                                                                                                         ll
                                                                                                                                   OPEN ACCESS



Article
Increasing generalization capability of battery
health estimation using continual learning
Yunhong Che,1,2 Yusheng Zheng,1,4 Simona Onori,2,* Xiaosong Hu,3,5,* and Remus Teodorescu1


SUMMARY
Accurate and reliable estimation of battery health is crucial for pre-
dictive health management. We report a strategy to strengthen the
accuracy and generalization of battery health estimation. The model
can be initially built based on one battery and then continuously up-
dated using unlabeled data and sparse limited labeled data
collected in early stages of testing batteries in different scenarios,
satisfying incremental improvement in practical applications. We
generate our datasets from 55 commercial pouch and prismatic bat-
teries aged for more than 116,000 cycles under various scenarios.
Our model achieves a root mean-square error of 1.312% for the esti-
mation of different dynamic current modes and rates and variable
temperature conditions over the entire lifespan using partial
charging data. Our model is interpreted by the post hoc strategy
with unbiased hidden features, prevents catastrophic forgetting,
and supports estimation using data collected in 3 min during ultra-
fast charging with errors of less than 2.8%.

INTRODUCTION
Lithium-ion batteries occupy main roles in energy storage systems for electric vehicles,
portable electronics, smart grids, and other electrified devices.1,2 However, battery
degradation is unavoidable during storage and usage due to numerous aging-related
side reactions that occur during charging, discharging, and storage, resulting in irrevers-
ible capacity and power decades.3–5 State of health (SOH), which is generally defined as
a ratio of current capacity to the initial capacity, is one key indicator to represent the
health state of batteries.6,7 It helps release the anxiety of cruise concern, fear of failure,
and over-usage from consumers, and guides proper maintenance and retirement for
second-life applications.8–10 Therefore, one critical and urgent challenge that must be
addressed is indirect and accurate SOH estimation for commercial lithium-ion batteries.

A wealth of literature has been published on this topic. Model-based approaches
aim to build physical models for the characterization of the microscopic electro-
chemical reactions, including the growth of solid electrolyte interphase films, loss                   1Department of Energy, Aalborg University, 9220
of active material, cathode oxidation, lithium plating, etc.,11–13 to estimate the                     Aalborg, Denmark
health of batteries through the estimation of aging-related parameters. The physical                   2Department of Energy Science and Engineering,

interpretation of the parameters is the most advantageous aspect, whereas the high                     Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
                                                                                                       3College of Mechanical and Vehicle Engineering,
computational burden and complex solving work prevent the practical deployment
                                                                                                       Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China
in a battery management system.14 As a result, recent research focuses more on
                                                                                                       4Department of Mechanical Engineering,
data-driven methods for battery health prognostics, which benefit from good flexi-                     Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK
bility, transferability, extrapolation capability, etc.                                                5Lead contact


                                                                                                       *Correspondence: sonori@stanford.edu (S.O.),
The general idea behind the data-driven methods is to use machine learning models                      xiaosonghu@ieee.org (X.H.)
to directly map the relationship between the available parameters/features and the                     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2023.101743



                                                                Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023 ª 2023 The Author(s).      1
                               This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
          ll
     OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                          Article

SOH.15–17 Zhang et al.,18 Gasper et al.,19 and Jones et al.20 investigated the physical
relationship between the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) curve and
battery aging and used machine learning to achieve accurate estimations of battery
SOH. However, acquiring EIS data online necessitates the use of specialized mea-
surement equipment, which is costly and difficult to implement onboard. The infor-
mation extracted from online measured data can also meet the requirement for bat-
tery health estimation. Zhu et al.21 investigated the voltage relaxation after fully
charging to extract several features. Previous works22–24 have also found high corre-
lations between the capacities and the information extracted from the discharge
curve. However, the long time required for the voltage relaxation followed by the
full charging and the random discharging profiles due to the load and environment
in the real world presents challenges for rapid and effective estimations. The
charging procedure, on the other hand, is more predictable and controllable
throughout the life cycle. Information from charging curves is widely extracted for
battery health estimation.9,25–28 For example, Roman et al.17 extracted several fea-
tures from the voltage and current curves during the charging process. In practical
applications, batteries are generally undergoing partial charging and partial dis-
charging. Features extracted from partial charging curves are becoming hot topics
to make the machine learning-based battery health estimation methods more robust
and practical.25,29,30 In feature-free deep learning, partial charging curves also
become the research objectives. Tian and co-workers31,32 used partial constant cur-
rent curves and short pulse curves to achieve accurate and reliable EIS prediction for
batteries over their entire their lifetime via deep learning. Therefore, the estimation
effectiveness needs evaluation under different and shallow charging stages to verify
the generalization regarding practical applications when developing the battery
health prognostics methods.

Regarding the machine learning models, various algorithms have been used such as
linear/multi-linear regression (LR),33,34 Gaussian process regression (GPR),27,28,35
support vector regression (SVR),22,36 XGboost regression,20,21 artificial neural net-
works,37–39 etc. Although it has been demonstrated that these algorithms achieve
accurate estimations, conventional data-driven models struggle to handle estima-
tions in a variety of scenarios because of domain discrepancies existing between
different batteries. Transfer learning is a promising method for improving estimation
performance on testing batteries by leveraging knowledge from source batteries. It
has been summarized in Liu et al.40 that transfer learning has promoted the develop-
ment of smarter battery management in modeling, state estimation, and aging
prognostics, especially in recent years. Both the domain adaptation41–43 and model
parameter fine-tuning strategies23,24,44–47 have been proven to have satisfactory
performance. However, the available data from the tested batteries are most unla-
beled while only very limited data can be recorded in practical industrial applica-
tions.48,49 Conventional machine learning methods mostly ignore the effectiveness
of taking advantage of unlabeled data for model improvement. Recent works50,51
have proven that, by leveraging the information from the unlabeled data, the accu-
racy of the target tasks, i.e., battery SOH estimation, can be improved by either
reducing the feature domain discrepancies or setting up a pre-trained model. This
is significant for industrial applications since most available data are unlabeled.
Therefore, the optimal use of both unlabeled data and sparsely labeled data from
batteries to incrementally improve the model accuracy and generalization is worth
investigating to promote industrial implementations. Conventional machine
learning-based methods suffer from catastrophic forgetting,52,53 which means
that, after transfer learning, the performance of the data-driven model on the target
domain improves while the estimation on source domains degrades. For the battery


2    Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023
                                                                                                                                ll
                                                                                                                           OPEN ACCESS
Article

health model, the model generalization on the different working conditions be-
comes one of the most concerned issues but such a problem cannot be tackled prop-
erly by simply updating the model using newly obtained information. The capability
to estimate battery health under different scenarios with only one model is lacking.
Continual learning or lifelong learning, which focuses on learning sequentially as
biological systems do and maintaining the ability learned before, provides great op-
portunities in battery health prognostics.54,55 The memory-based framework is easy
to understand and implement while the important information that represents the
learned characteristics needs investigating to alleviate the storage challenge. Poor
interpretability is another major disadvantage of conventional machine learning-
based methods. The interpretability of machine learning is valuable to help under-
stand models by explaining or presenting their behaviors in some understandable
terms.56 A good explanation will improve the trust of users to adopt the machine
learning model and help researchers to know why the system fails and seek safety
improvement. Generally, methods for machine learning interpretability can be
divided into model based and post hoc based.57 Regarding machine learning for
battery health prognostics, the model-based method can be realized by analyzing
the dependencies between the physical features and the output battery health met-
rics.58 It helps understand the mechanisms better while physical modeling and
feature extraction are required. For the post-hoc-based method, it is significant to
analyze the learned characteristics of machine learning to help interpret and under-
stand the reason for the model behaviors, which can be applied for pure data-driven
methods but is still ignored by most existing works.

In this work, we seek to investigate the way to make full use of both unlabeled data and
labeled data from batteries operating under various unseen conditions to improve the
accuracy and generalization of the data-driven battery health estimation models without
catastrophic forgetting. Instead of using large amounts of source data for model
training, we first built an initial machine learning model using data from a commonly
aged battery and then improved it during different applications, making it continuously
learn the aging information that covers various scenarios to satisfy the estimations under
various scenarios. Only unlabeled data and limited sparsely labeled data are required for
memory-based continual learning updating. As shown in Figure 1, the unlabeled data,
which can be obtained from each operating cycle, are used for the unsupervised domain
adaptation, while the sparsely labeled data from the testing battery (limited in practical
applications) and the stored sparse data from previous scenarios are adopted for
continual updating. The detailed framework introduction and model updating process
are described in Note S1, methods, and Note S4. The machine learning model can be
interpreted based on the unbiased hidden state distributions under different scenarios.
The comparisons between existing methods are provided to explain the advantage of
the proposed method regarding the performance metrics and learned characteristics
interpretation. The generalization of our model is also evaluated using shallow charging
processes for the different practical requirements in different implementation scenarios.
Comprehensive aging datasets covering different battery chemistries, formats (pouch
and prismatic), different environmental conditions, and different current modes and
types are generated to verify the generalization of the proposed method under different
application scenarios.


RESULTS
Data generation
Experimental data on different kinds of commercial battery cells are generated in
this study. The batteries are cycled in the thermal chamber or room environment



                                                                              Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023   3
           ll
     OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                      Article




Figure 1. Workflow
The basic experiment is first conducted to collect data on one commonly aged battery. Then, the collected data is used for base model training and
some spare labeled data containing full aging information is stored for later training. When the data from batteries tested with different operating
profiles and environmental conditions are collected, the continuous unlabeled data, along with the stored sparsely labeled data from the source
domain, is used to retrain the base model with the domain adaptation strategy. When discontinuous labeled data from the tested battery are obtained,
the model is further trained on top of the domain-adapted model. Finally, online estimations are performed using the updated model.



with different current profiles and rates using the platform shown in Figure S1. These
batteries are from different formats and chemistry and are aged under primary appli-
cation scenarios and secondary application scenarios. The summary of the gener-
ated dataset is listed in Table S1. The detailed experimental procedure to generate
these datasets is listed in Table S2 and Note S2. Different from most of the datasets
in the published works,2,18,20,21,33,48 where the small cylindrical or coin batteries
were used for cycling, this paper focuses on the data generation based on pouch
cells and prismatic cells. These two types of batteries are widely used in energy stor-
age systems (e.g., EVs and grid stations), where limited source data are available at
the current time. In addition, we also test batteries using dynamic discharging pro-
files and under variable temperatures and continue aging some of them in their sec-
ondary lifespan to make our dataset cover more aging scenarios and applications.
The dynamic loadings and variable temperature conditions help emulate battery ag-
ing under practical usage with seasonal variations,59,60 which cause the degradation
curves in Figures 2B and 2C to fluctuate with the variation of environmental temper-
atures. A total of 55 pouch and prismatic batteries were tested with 116,681 cycles in
total, which are publicly available to be used for further research on battery health
prognostics. The considered information in the cycling test is shown in Figure 2A.
The degradation curves of batteries in dataset 1 to dataset 5 are shown in
Figures 2B–2F.


Health estimation
We first demonstrate the effectiveness of the estimations for the batteries working
under different dynamic profiles and variable temperatures. The SOH is outputted
by the machine learning model by inputting the partial charging capacity-voltage
(Q-V) sequence. The detailed model construction and training are described in
methods and Notes S1–S4. This application scenario is close to practical


4     Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023
                                                                                                                                          ll
                                                                                                                                    OPEN ACCESS
Article




Figure 2. Cycling test for data generation and normalized capacity curves of the tested batteries
(A) The main influence factors affecting battery health estimation that are considered in the aging test, where different battery chemistry and formats,
different temperature conditions, and different current modes and rates are included in the generated dataset.
(B) The normalized capacities versus aging cycles in dataset 1 with different discharging profiles and variable temperatures (cause the degradation
trajectories to fluctuate with temperature variations).
(C) The normalized capacities versus aging cycles of second-life batteries in dataset 2 under constant temperature and variable temperatures.
(D) The capacities versus aging cycles in dataset 3 with different current rates and temperatures.
(E) The capacities versus aging cycles in dataset 4 with different current rates and temperatures.
(F) The capacities versus aging cycles in dataset 5 under room temperature with 1/3C current in the whole lifespan.


applications where the constant current condition (which is generally experimented
in the lab) is used for the estimations under dynamic current conditions with variable
temperatures (close to field data), and only three sparsely labeled samples from the
first 10% data of the test batteries are used. The results in Figure 3A show that the
initial model can be used to estimate the SOH of batteries aging under different dy-
namic working profiles through a domain adaptative continual learning process.
Estimation errors show that most entries fall in the range of [0.04, 0.01]. When
the model is applied for the SOH estimation of batteries operating under dynamic
working profiles and/or variable temperatures (the results in Figure 3B), estimations
are still stable and converged to the real values although more outliers appear. The
estimation errors are mostly within [0.04, 0.02], and more than half fell in [0.01,
0.01]. The R square (R2) between the estimated SOH and the real SOH is larger
than 0.87. Both estimations show significant improvement in the accuracy and
convergency to the results obtained by the initial base model (the results shown in
Figure S2), which indicates that our model can quickly suit different application sce-
narios through only unlabeled and very few labeled data for continual learning.

The estimations for the batteries in the second lifespan under constant temperature and
variable temperatures are shown in Figures 3C and 3D, indicating that our model also
meets the accuracy and reliability requirements. The R2 between the estimations and


                                                                                      Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023      5
           ll
     OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                        Article




Figure 3. Results of SOH estimations for batteries aged under various conditions
(A) Estimated SOH and estimated errors for batteries in dataset 1 aged under constant temperature with dynamic discharge profiles.
(B) Estimated SOH and estimated errors for batteries in dataset 1 aging under variable temperatures with dynamic discharge profiles.
(C) Estimated SOH and estimated errors for secondary life batteries in dataset 2 aged under constant temperature.
(D) Estimated SOH and estimated errors for secondary life batteries in dataset 2 aging under variable temperatures.
(E) Estimated SOH and estimated errors for batteries in dataset 3 aged under different current rates and temperature conditions using only cell 2 (1C/
25  C) for base model training.
(F) Estimated SOH and estimated errors for batteries in dataset 3 aged under different current rates and temperature conditions using only cell 6 (1C/
35  C) for base model training. Our model trained by one battery aged under constant temperature and constant current can be used to estimate the
SOH under various conditions with most errors less than 0.04 (99.75% for 114,741 entries in total), which shows great improvement to the base model
(Figure S2) using a few early data for continual learning.




6     Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023
                                                                                                                              ll
                                                                                                                         OPEN ACCESS
Article

the real values is larger than 0.95, and the estimated errors are mostly within [0.03,
0.02]. The estimation results using the initial base model are shown in Figure S2, which
have larger errors than our model. In short, the estimations meet the accuracy and reli-
ability requirement satisfactorily under both dynamic discharge current and constant
discharge current, both the constant temperature and dynamic temperatures, and in
both primary life batteries and secondary life batteries.

The batteries in the third dataset are aged under different constant temperatures us-
ing constant currents with different rates. Batteries aged in dataset 3 have a large ca-
pacity (100 Ah), which makes them suitable for heavy duty EVs and grid storage sta-
tions. We evaluate our model using one battery aged under one specific current rate
and temperature to estimate the SOH of other batteries aged with other current
rates and temperatures. Batteries using a common aging scenario with 1 C current
under 25 C (cell 2 in dataset 3) and 1 C current under 35 C (cell 6 in dataset 3) are
used to build the initial base model to estimate other batteries through continual
learning using early information, and the results are shown in Figures 3E and 3F,
respectively. The estimated values converge to the real values satisfactorily with
R2 of 0.924 and 0.936, respectively. Similarly, most errors are less than 0.04, indi-
cating accurate and robust estimations across a wide temperature range (25 C–
55 C) and different current rates. The estimations based on the base model are
shown in Figures S2E and S2F, where the results show that only a few estimated
values converge to the real values while the majority diverge, indicating the poor
generalization of conventional data-driven models.

Feature distribution interpretation
Lack of interpretation in most data-driven methods such as ‘‘black boxes’’ causes dif-
ficulties in understanding the mechanisms behind their performance. In contrast, our
method tried to interpret the model performance by looking inside the developed
data-driven model using the post hoc analysis strategy. The hidden states are critical
information for the final output, i.e., the estimations of the neural network model.
Therefore, we demonstrate the distribution of the hidden states, referring to the
node values, in the same layer for both source and target batteries in our work to
explain the model performance. The output distribution of the domain adaptative
layer for the batteries in the target domain and source domain are shown in Figures 4
A–4C for datasets 1, 2, and 3, respectively. The output distributions of the same layer
in the initial base model and the updated model using the fine-tuning strategy with
newly obtained labeled data from the target battery45–47 are shown in Figures 4D–4F
and 4G–4I, respectively. The comparison in Figure 4 demonstrates that the distribu-
tion of the hidden states has nearly perfect overlaps in our model, which gives an
interpretation of why the model performs satisfactorily in both source and target do-
mains. The hidden state’s distribution of the base model shows domain discrep-
ancies between the target and source batteries, which makes the model fail to
have high accuracy and reliability on the target batteries. As for fine-tuning strat-
egy-based models, the distributions also show discrepancies, which improve the
model performance on the target battery but deteriorate the performance on the
source battery (further discussed in the following section). As a result, our model
can be regarded as a ‘‘gray box,’’ where the hidden state distributions help interpret
the model performance properly despite the unknown physical meaning of these
hidden states.

Continual learning ability
A major limitation to the generalization of data-driven models used is the ‘‘cata-
strophic forgetting.’’ On the contrary, our model can continually learn new aging


                                                                            Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023   7
           ll
     OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                          Article




Figure 4. Hidden state distributions interpretation
(A–C) The distribution of the hidden states outputted by the domain adaptative layer for the source batteries and target batteries based on our model in
datasets 1, 2, and 3, respectively.
(D–F) The distribution of the hidden states outputted by the same layer for the source batteries and target batteries based on the base model in
datasets 1, 2, and 3, respectively.
(G–I) The distribution of the hidden states outputted by the same layer for the source batteries and target batteries based on the purely fine-tuned
model in datasets 1, 2, and 3, respectively. The state distribution of the target domain overlaps better in our model, which enables satisfactory
estimations of the target batteries while maintaining the performance of the source batteries.



information while maintaining the ability to estimate the health of batteries that have
similar aging conditions to the learned information before. We use dataset 3 for the
demonstration and evaluation since different temperatures cause obviously
different degradation patterns, as shown in Figure 2. The estimation results are
shown in Figure 5. First, the initial base model trained by cell 2 (aged with 1C under
25 C) is used to estimate the SOH of all batteries aged with 1C under 35 C and 55 C,
and 0.3C under 35 C, the results could be seen from Figure 5A. Then, the sparse
data of this battery are stored in the data storage buffer to continually train the
model with domain adaptation using sparsely labeled data and unlabeled data
collected from early stages from one battery aging under 35 C. Then the updated
model is again used for the estimation of all batteries, as shown in Figure 5B. After
that, sparse data from one battery aging under 1C/55 C and 0.3C/35 C are


8     Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023
                                                                                                                                            ll
                                                                                                                                      OPEN ACCESS
Article




Figure 5. Continual learning evaluations
(A and B) (A) Estimated SOH and estimated error of batteries in dataset 2 with the initial base model trained using data from 1C/25  C. (B) Estimated SOH
and estimated errors of batteries in dataset 2 with continual learning using data from a battery aging under 1C/35  C based on the model from (A).
(C) Estimated SOH and estimated errors of batteries in dataset 2 with continual learning using data from a battery aging under 1C/55 C based on the
model from (B).
(D) Estimated SOH and estimated errors of batteries in dataset 2 with continual learning using data from a battery aging under 0.3C/35  C based on the
model from (C).



                                                                                       Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023       9
           ll
      OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                            Article

Figure 5. Continued
(E) Hidden states distribution of batteries aging under different scenarios from the model in (A).
(F) Hidden states distribution of batteries aging under different scenarios from the model in (D). Our model has a good ability to learn the aging
information with the availability of limited data from different scenarios while maintaining satisfactory performance on the previously learned scenarios,
which enables our model to cover more estimation requirements and ensure the feature distributions converge to similar distributions.

continually used to update our model, whose estimation performances on all batte-
ries are shown in Figures 5C and 5D, respectively. Our model continually learned
new aging information under different scenarios while maintaining the previously
learned information successfully, so that the accuracy and generalization are incre-
mentally improved. The R2 increased from 1.669 to 0.969 from the initial base
model to the final model. The main error distribution decreases from [0.152,
0.014] to [0.019, 0.034]. The root mean-square error (RMSE) and mean absolute er-
ror (MAE) also decrease continually from case A to case D in Figures 5A–5D, as listed
in Table S3, where the RMSE and MAE for the final model on the estimation of all the
batteries are reduced to 0.959% and 0.629%, respectively, from 8.957% to 7.399%.
The comparative results shown in Figures 5E and 5F, which show the hidden state
distributions of batteries for various scenarios generated by the initial model and
the final updated model, can be used to interpret the model. This explains why
the initial model failed for health estimation under various application scenarios
and why our model’s generalization grew. The feature distributions are almost over-
lapping, which improves the estimation model’s generalization and accuracy under a
variety of working conditions. To demonstrate the advantage of our method
compared with the existing fine-tuning-based method, which purely uses newly ob-
tained labeled data from the target domain to update the model, the performances
of the fine-tuning-based method under the same updating scenarios are shown in
Figures S3A–S3C. It demonstrates that, although the fine-tuned model performs
better in the target battery after updating the model, it forgets the historically
learned characteristics and causes a worse performance in previous estimation sce-
narios. Therefore, when purely applying the fine-tuning strategy, catastrophic
forgetting happens, making the model fail to satisfy the estimations under different
scenarios. The hidden states distribution shown in Figure S3D also interprets the
reason for this phenomenon after fine-tuning. That is the domain discrepancies be-
tween different scenarios still exist, causing poor model performance on the previ-
ous tasks. The results are of great value to industrial applications, where the initial
model can be built with some experiments in the lab before implementations and
be incrementally improved during applications in various unseen working scenarios
such as loading profiles and environment temperatures.

Different battery manufacturers
The other two datasets (datasets 4 and 5) are used to evaluate the generalization of
our method. The estimation results are shown in Figures S4 and S5. Our model
meets the requirement for the estimations under different scenarios with R2 greater
than 0.978 and errors within 0.03 with dataset 4. Dataset 5 contains aging data in a
standard current mode under room temperature for the whole lifespan (SOH re-
duces to less than 0.4). The estimation results shown in Figure S5 indicate accurate
and reliable estimations with R2 larger than 0.996 and errors within 0.05. Therefore,
combined with the estimation on all five datasets, our model has satisfactory gener-
alization ability on the application under different battery chemistry and formats,
different working profiles, and environmental temperatures.

Comparisons with other transfer learnings
The avoidance of catastrophic forgetting while learning new aging information is
one major advantage of our model. We compare our method with other transfer


10    Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023
                                                                                                                                     ll
                                                                                                                                OPEN ACCESS
Article




Figure 6. Comparative results with other transfer learnings
(A and B) The estimated RMSE for the target batteries and source batteries for datasets 1 and 2.
(C and D) The estimated RMSE for the target batteries and source batteries for datasets 3 and 4. Compared with the base model and models with other
transfer learning strategies, our model shows better accuracy and reliability.



learning strategies to evaluate the accuracy in all estimation scenarios. Fine-tuning
and basic domain adaptation are included, where four models in total are included
for the comparisons. The meaning of each model is described in Note S3. The RMSE
of the target and source batteries in datasets 1 and 2 (results contain the two data-
sets) are shown in Figures 6A and 6B while the corresponding MAE are shown in
Figures S6A and S6B, respectively. It shows that our model has the best performance
for the batteries working under different dynamic discharging profiles and variable
temperatures with a narrow error distribution, indicating the best accuracy and reli-
ability compared with other models. The RMSE and MAE results for batteries con-
tained in datasets 3 and 4 (results containing the two datasets) are shown in
Figures 6C, 6D, S6C, and S6D respectively. In this case, the target batteries have
different current rates and different temperatures to the source battery, which
causes the base model to have poor accuracy on the target domain. When the infor-
mation from the batteries is obtained for transfer learning or continual learning, er-
rors are reduced significantly. This indicates from the results that unlabeled data
used for reducing domain discrepancies between the source battery and target bat-
tery are also beneficial for accuracy improvement. This is because the mapping re-
lationships between the input measurements and output SOH are more adaptable
for the testing battery by minimizing the domain discrepancies. Compared with
the pure unlabeled data-enabled domain adaptation, sparse limited data help
improve the accuracy of the target domain, while pure fine-tuning suffers from cata-
strophic forgetting. Our model, on the contrary, maintains good performance on


                                                                                   Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023   11
            ll
       OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                   Article

Table 1. Comparative evaluation of our model and other transfer learnings (%)
                 RMSE for target domain           MAE for target domain            RMSE for source domain       MAE for source domain
Case             Mean      Max.        SD         Mean       Max.         SD       Mean      Max.      SD       Mean      Max.      SD
BASE             4.573     17.987      4.562      4.193      17.965       4.475    0.172     0.324     0.087    0.126     0.242     0.067
FT               2.361     11.213      2.218      1.838      8.129        1.700    3.108     12.633    2.869    2.826     12.076    2.679
DA               2.259     5.704       1.412      1.949      5.484        1.274    0.420     1.838     0.339    0.328     1.797     0.321
DA_FT            2.361     11.213      2.218      1.838      8.129        1.700    3.108     12.633    2.869    2.826     12.076    2.679
DA_CT            1.312     3.015       0.682      1.085      2.662        0.628    0.159     0.623     0.102    0.128     0.666     0.107
GPR              3.952     17.959      3.999      3.497      17.938       3.719    0.077     0.199     0.056    0.056     0.147     0.042
RFR              3.930     17.834      3.462      3.549      17.722       3.372    0.039     0.074     0.021    0.026     0.046     0.013
LR               14.758    185.806     35.519     10.784     147.825      27.389   0.129     0.297     0.089    0.095     0.221     0.067
SVR              4.137     23.651      5.170      3.893      23.633       5.121    0.225     0.604     0.181    0.179     0.523     0.163
CNN              6.2151    25.3715     6.4348     5.7801     25.2623      6.3335   0.1894    0.4955    0.1488   0.1390    0.3739    0.1143
LSTM             4.4001    26.9428     5.4930     3.8836     20.7222      4.9787   0.4001    0.5633    0.1475   0.2930    0.4101    0.1125
CNN-LSTM         3.4643    16.3019     3.3709     3.1271     16.2852      3.1825   0.2458    0.4566    0.1345   0.1828    0.3384    0.0996



both the target domain and source domain with the errors located in the smallest
range, indicating satisfactory accuracy and reliability. Refer to Figures S7–S11 and
Tables S4–S8 for the estimation results of each testing battery cell and the compar-
isons between different models.

The numerical statistical results for all the batteries are listed in Table 1. Our model
has minimal mean and maximum errors, and minimal standard deviation (SD) of error
distributions, indicating accurate and reliable estimations on all domains with
different aging profiles and temperature conditions. The mean and maximum
RMSE for the target domain are 1.312% and 3.015%, respectively, reducing more
than three times from the initial base model, while the SD reduced significantly
from 4.562 to only 0.682. The improvement of our model compared with other trans-
fer learning strategies is also reflected in Table 1. In addition, four widely used ma-
chine learning methods for battery SOH estimation are also included for evaluation,
which are LR, SVR, GPR, and random forest regression. As shown in Table 1, like the
basic neural network-based method, these four machine learning methods all have
good performances on the trained source domain but fail to provide satisfactory es-
timations for target domains with various application conditions. It is also foresee-
able that these models will also suffer from catastrophic forgetting when they are
simply updated with newly acquired data such as the fine-tuning strategy. The
results with other advanced deep learning models including LSTM, CNN, and
CNN-LSTM for the base model construction are also listed in Table 1. The results
indicate that CNN-LSTM has better accuracy compared with feedforward NN,
LSTM, and CNN for the SOH estimations. While the base model also has poor gener-
alization ability under different working scenarios, reflected by the large maximum
values of the RMSE and MAE, from the battery that has diverse degradation pat-
terns. Therefore, the model is still required to be updated during applications, espe-
cially under different working conditions to improve the model’s accuracy and
generalization, which can be achieved by the proposed framework. Therefore, the
proposed framework shows priority regarding the performance on both source
and target domains compared with conventional machine learning and transfer
learning methods. The main objective is to update the model incrementally so
that the feedforward NN is applied for the demonstrations. In real applications,
the base network can be constructed with different networks. For example, the
CNN-LSTM can be used for the base network part under condition data showing
poor quality than experimental data, while the proposed framework is generally
applicable for the model continually updating during applications.


12     Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023
                                                                                                                                             ll
                                                                                                                                       OPEN ACCESS
Article




Figure 7. Generalization with a different voltage range for model input and different ratios for continual learning
(A) The estimated mean RMSE, MAE, and fitted R 2 of the three batteries with three kinds of dynamic working profiles with different voltage ranges (V i and
V j represent the lower voltage and upper voltage in the partial voltage sequence). The results indicate that our model can meet the estimation
requirement using data from a voltage range less than 0.1 V in 3 min charging with an error less than 2.78% and fitted R 2 larger than 0.8.
(B) The estimated mean RMSE, MAE, and fitted R 2 for the three batteries in dataset 1 aging under three kinds of dynamic profiles with different ratios of
data for model updating. Our model has errors less than 0.94% and fitted R 2 larger than 0.96 with only 5% data for continual learning and maintaining
high accuracy with different ratios.


Different voltage ranges and data ratios for model updating
Practical applications usually have a partial charging process and the usually used
voltage ranges vary with the real requirement such as in EVs and smart grids. There-
fore, it is also significant to evaluate our model under different partial charging con-
ditions for the generalization assessment. We select three batteries aged under
three different dynamic profiles to evaluate our model by changing the voltage
range from 3.6 to 4.2 V in the first stage charging process. The mean results of the
three testing batteries are shown in Figure 7A. It shows that, when the lower voltage
is below 3.8 V and the upper voltage is larger than 3.9 V, our model realizes RMSE
and MAE less than 2.78% and the fitting R2 is larger than 0.8. When the upper
voltage is larger than 4.0 V, the errors are reduced to less than 1.67% while the R2
is larger than 0.9. Considering the charging process of the battery in dataset 1, as
shown in Figure S12, the charging time between 3.8 and 3.9 V in the first charging
stage is less than 3 min and the charging time between 3.8 and 4.0 V is less than
4 min, which enables our model to be used in practical applications using short-
term charging data.

We evaluate our model and other transfer learning models with the increase of ratio
for model updating, and the mean values are shown in Figure 7B. The results on the
source batteries are shown in Figure S13. The results indicate that our model quickly
reduces the errors to less than 0.942% and increase the R2 to larger than 0.966 even


                                                                                        Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023      13
          ll
     OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                         Article

with only 5% ratio of data for model updating, where only two sparsely labeled sam-
ples are used. Compared with other transfer learning strategies that may have poor
performance under some scenarios, our model maintains high performance in all
cases. Therefore, from the evaluations of different voltage ranges and available
data rations, the model has promising industrial application abilities under random
depths of discharges during their whole lives. The batter health estimation model
can still be incrementally improved based on the proposed framework.


Full life estimation
Finally, we evaluate our model on the estimation for the full lifespan. In the above
sections, the estimation results of dataset 5 indicate that our model provides accu-
rate estimations for the whole lifespan. Here, we use the battery in dataset 1 to es-
timate the second-life battery application in dataset 2, which is the same battery but
with a different aging profile retired from dataset 1. The results shown in Figure S14
indicate that our model has better accuracy than other models, meeting the estima-
tion requirement for the second-life battery by taking advantage of information
gathered from the primary-life battery. This is significant for practical applications
since it is assumed that many batteries are retired from EVs to be implemented in
smart grids, etc., and the model developed in our method shows great application
potential to continually learn the aging information to meet the health estimation for
health estimation of second-life batteries.


DISCUSSION
We developed a data-driven model for battery health estimation based on domain
adaptative continual learning to solve the natural challenges of low generalization,
the large requirement of labeled data, catastrophic forgetting, and poor interpreta-
tion. Our model is initially built using the data collected from one common aging test
and can be adopted for the estimation under unknown conditions with only unla-
beled data and sparsely limited labeled data at early stages, where the RMSE is
less than 0.95 and the R2 is larger than 0.96 under the case with only two sparsely
labeled samples from the first 5% aging data, indicating data efficient for the
modeling. With three sparsely labeled samples collected from the first 10% aging
data, our model achieves the most absolute errors of less than 5% despite different
battery chemistry and formats, different aging profiles and current rates, and
different environmental temperatures, with only one battery used for initial
modeling. The proposed method is valuable for industrial applications, where the
initial model can be constructed via some lab data and be continually improved
with unlabeled data and sparsely labeled data obtained during usage to incremen-
tally improve the model generalization.

Our model is interpreted by post hoc analysis, and succeeds in reducing the domain
discrepancy between the source domain and target domain that interprets the satis-
factory estimation performances. Our model is continuously improved with the avail-
ability of both unlabeled and labeled data from unknown conditions while maintain-
ing the performance on previous tasks, which avoids catastrophic forgetting.
Compared with other transfer learning strategies, both the unlabeled data and
labeled data from the target batteries are well used for model improvement. Our
model has better accuracy and generalization under different testing scenarios,
with a mean RMSE of only 1.312%, and even the worst testing achieves an RMSE
of only 3.015%. Our model is also more reliable to the different ratios of data
used for learning compared with other transfer learnings. Finally, our model also
supports estimations using shallow partially charged data within 3 min for a mean


14   Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023
                                                                                                                                ll
                                                                                                                           OPEN ACCESS
Article

RMSE of less than 2.78% under three typical dynamic discharging scenarios and
achieves a mean RMSE of 1.67% with data collected within 4 min. Our model is a
general framework that can be easily extended to modeling with other neural net-
works and with a feature-based method. Therefore, our model is promising for im-
plementation in onboard applications.

The proposed method shows satisfactory performance on the health estimations un-
der different application scenarios. However, there are still some limitations that
need to be addressed in future work. Firstly, there are some local large errors exist-
ing in the estimations due to the quality of measured data and the quick change of
environmental situations. In future work, the physics information from the electro-
chemical model is supposed to be integrated to reduce these errors and further
improve the generalization and interpretability by explaining with physical aging
mechanism. Secondly, the preset manually tailed transfer weight is used in this pa-
per for domain adaptation, and the overall performance considering all the testing
scenarios has been significantly improved. One specific value for all testing sce-
narios also tells the strategy is general and avoids biased results with carefully
selected weight for each specific testing scenario. However, it cannot be optimal
for all the specific conditions, indicating a more intelligent optimization method is
worth investigating to adapt the best choice of transfer weight under different sce-
narios during training the model with optimization methods. Finally, the extrapola-
tion to other types of batteries such as all solid batteries, and Li-sulfur batteries, and
the implementation in battery packs are valuable to evaluate the effectiveness of the
proposed framework.


EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Resource availability
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and materials should be directed to
and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Xiaosong Hu (xiaosonghu@ieee.org).

Materials availability
This study did not generate any unique materials.

Data and code availability
The data generated in this study can be found at https://data.mendeley.com/
datasets/n3b54nsw8m/2. Additional raw data may be available upon reasonable
request.

Battery cycling and data preparation
Experiments for the aging of several commercial batteries are conducted in this pa-
per for the verification of the proposed method. The first is ultra-fast charging fol-
lowed by a dynamic discharging profiles-based battery dataset. To the best knowl-
edge of the authors, this is the first public dataset with different dynamic discharging
profiles to age the batteries until end of life. Different dynamic profiles are included,
which are urban dynamic profile, highway profile, and hybrid profile. The current
load of each profile and the corresponding voltage are shown in Figure S15. Two cy-
cles of the dynamic current lasting 24 min are used. The mean current is set to ensure
that the three dynamic loadings have similar throughput during this period. Two
different time periods are considered to load the dynamic currents, which makes
the dynamic loading conducted at two different state of charge (SOC) stages.
One battery aging under the constant current is used as the benchmark to illustrate
the types of current on the aging influence of batteries. To make the experiment


                                                                              Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023   15
          ll
     OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                            Article

closer to the practical applications, another batch is conducted on the periodically
changed temperatures varied from 25 C–35 C to 25 C–15 C, which emulates the in-
fluence of seasonal variations on battery aging.60 Again, this is the first dataset con-
ducted on the changeable environmental temperatures to the best knowledge of
the authors, where the degradation trajectories are varied with environmental tem-
peratures during aging. The normalization is conducted by calculating the ratio of
the current available capacity to the fresh capacity (starting from 25 C), which makes
the demanded estimation of current capacity to be easily obtained by multiplying
the estimated SOH with the fresh capacity. There are 15 batteries in total in this data-
set, whose capacity curves are shown in Figure 2. The second dataset is the same
batteries from the first dataset, which are used for the constant current discharging
after the batteries retired from dataset 1. These batteries are now considered sec-
ond-life batteries. The CC-CV charging and CC discharging are conducted to
continually age the batteries. Similarly, constant environment temperature and
changeable temperatures are considered. The first two datasets are collected
from the pouch batteries. The third and fourth dataset is collected from the aging
experiment conducted on the prismatic cells with 100 Ah. Most of the public data-
sets are aging on cylindrical batteries, while prismatic batteries are also popular in
real applications for both electric transportation and energy storage stations. We
aged these batteries with different current rates and environmental temperatures
to generate data seen in different application scenarios. The last battery dataset is
collected by aging the small polymer batteries from fresh to SOH less than 0.4 for
the study of SOH estimation over the entire lifetime.

The feature-free method is adopted in our model, where the partially charged Q-V
curve is selected as input information. Note that the incomplete charging/discharg-
ing process when starting the test from reset is deleted. The abnormal data such as a
larger difference between the sample from previous and later data are filtered with a
moving average. The raw measured data changed with battery aging, which caused
the Q-V curve to be unaligned. Therefore, the interpolation method is used to obtain
the Q-V curve in a certain voltage range, where linear interpolation is adopted. To
ensure the online application, the partial voltage range is used, where [3.6, 4.2] is
selected as the initial voltage range for NCA and polymer batteries while [3.3, 3.5]
is used for LFP batteries with a voltage interval of 5 and 2 mV for interpolation to
ensure the same input length. The voltage ranges can also be reduced considering
the specific applications and are evaluated in the results.

Machine learning model
For the end-to-end health estimation, the measured data of partial charging Q-V se-
quences are needed for the input while the SOH is the output. For the purpose of us-
ing a simple model to demonstrate the proposed model while also guaranteeing the
estimation performance, a feedforward neural network with backward propagation is
adopted, where two hidden layers and an output layer are included. The design of the
framework is described in Figure S16. The source labeled data from one battery,
stored sparse data in previous tasks, and sparsely labeled data from the target bat-
tery are used to train the model by minimizing the mean square error loss of the
output layer and the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) loss of the domain adaptive
layer simultaneously. To interpret the model performance based on the post hoc
analysis, the distribution of hidden states of the domain adaptative layer is also illus-
trated. Domain discrepancies would cause divergent distributions of hidden states in
the source domain and target domain, leading to the poor generalization ability of
conventional machine learning models. By analyzing the distributions of hidden
states in both the source and target domain, we find the interpretations for the


16   Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023
                                                                                                                                                     ll
                                                                                                                                                OPEN ACCESS
Article

high performance of our model under different scenarios. It should be noted that the
bottleneck layer can be changed to other machine learning models such as CNN,
LSTM, CNN-LSTM, etc., which are widely used networks in battery health prognos-
tics, and the implementations of these machine learning models are also provided
for reference. The hyperparameters and settings of the neural network are listed in
Note S4. The basic calculation of a neuron in fully connected layers by the weight
w, bias b, and states h from the former layer is denoted as,

                                                 X
                                                 N
                                         y =            wi hi + bi                                (Equation 1)
                                                 i= 1

The first hidden layer is set as a sharing layer while the second hidden layer is set as a
domain adaptative layer, where the MMD is calculated between the hidden states of
the source battery and target battery as a loss that needs to be reduced. The MMD is
a measure of the difference between two probability distributions in the mean
embedding of the features.61 Given two samples in two datasets X = fxi gni =1 1 and
Y = fyi gni =2 1 , the MMD between the X and Y could be expressed as,62
                                                                
                   MMDH ðX; Y Þ = supF ˛ H Ep ½FðxÞ  Eq ½FðyÞ            (Equation 2)

where H represents a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), Fð $Þ is a nonlinear
mapping function from raw data space to the RKHS space, and p and q are the prob-
ability distributions of generating the two datasets. The empirical approximation to
the MMD can be denoted as follows,42,63
                                                                
                                1 n                           2
                                 X                1 X
                                                        n2
                                                                 
                                       1

             MMDH2 ðX; Y Þ    =          Fðxi Þ           F yj                                 (Equation 3)
                                n1 i = 1          n2 j = 1      
                                                                              H

The kernel trick is then used to get the expression,42

                    1 X
                          n1 X  n2
                                                   2 X
                                                            n1 X  n2              1 X    n1 X  n2           
  MMDH2 ðX; Y Þ =                   k   xi ; xj                      k   xi ; yj  +                 k yi ; yj
                    n21 i = 1 j = 1                 n1 n2 i = 1 j = 1                n22 i = 1 j = 1
                                                                                                  (Equation 4)
where kð$; $Þ is the kernel function of the RKHS. In this paper, the Gaussian radial ba-
sis function is used,42

                                                 ð kxi  yj k Þ
                                                                     2


                                      k xi ; yj = e     2g2                                       (Equation 5)

The final loss function during continual learning is constructed as follows
                                     X
                                 L=     LMSE + lLMMD                      (Equation 6)

During the initial base training and fine-tuning using labeled data, the MMD loss is
set as 0 and only the MSE loss is considered to train the neural network. In the
domain adaptation process, the MSE loss of the source battery, and the MMD loss
of the domain discrepancy between the source battery and target battery of the
domain adaptative layer are reduced during training. The weight factor of MMD
loss is set as 0.01 for all the testing cases for the generalization of our model. The
Adam optimization method is used to train the model and the early stopping strat-
egy is adopted to avoid overfitting. The RMSE, MAE, and R2 are used for the accu-
racy evaluations of the estimation results, which are defined as follows.
                                         vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                                         u
                                         u1 N  X
                               RMSE = t                ðyi  zi Þ2 ;        (Equation 7)
                                           N i= 1




                                                                                                   Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023   17
            ll
      OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                                    Article

                                                    X
                                                  1 N
                                       MAE =             jyi  zi j;                         (Equation 8)
                                                  N i= 1

                                              P            2
                                                ðyi  zi Þ
                                              i
                                        R = 1P
                                          2
                                                           2
                                                             ;                               (Equation 9)
                                                ðyi  y i Þ
                                                    i

where y represents the true value and z is the estimated value while y is the mean value of
all the true values. During model training, one source battery is firstly used for the initial
model training, then the unlabeled data and limited labeled data from the target batte-
ries are used for the domain adaptative continual learning to update the model to
improve the generalization under different scenarios. Therefore, the model is incremen-
tally updated from the beginning to the various applications. Note that the cross-valida-
tion is used during the initial model training and is not applied during subsequent model
updating, since only very limited labeled data is available in the testing scenarios. Be-
sides, early stooping is also adopted to help avoid overfitting. The specific cell that
serves as the source battery is listed in Tables S4–S8 in each test.

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.
2023.101743.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work of X.H. was funded by the National Key Research and Development Pro-
gram (grant no. 2022YFB3305403), the project of basic research funds for central uni-
versities (grant no. 2022CDJDX-006), the Natural Science Foundation of China (grant
nos. 52111530194 and 72361137006), , and the Talent Plan Project of Chongqing
(grant no. cstc2021ycjh-bgzxm0295). The work of R.T. was funded by the ‘‘SMART
BATTERY’’ project, granted by Villum Foundation in 2021 (project no. 222860).

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Y.C. conceived the study, carried out the experiments, analyzed the data, developed
the model, and wrote the paper. Y.C. and Y.Z. prepared the first and revised drafts.
Y.C., Y.Z., S.O., X.H., and R.T. discussed the results and commented on the manu-
script. R.T., and X.H. supervised the work.

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.

Received: September 7, 2023
Revised: October 24, 2023
Accepted: November 20, 2023
Published: December 12, 2023


REFERENCES
 1. Jiang, B., Gent, W.E., Mohr, F., Das, S.,               B., Perkins, N., Yang, Z., et al. (2020). Closed-     electrochemical signatures. Cell Rep. Phys.
    Berliner, M.D., Forsuelo, M., Zhao, H., Attia,          loop optimization of fast-charging protocols          Sci. 2, 100352.
    P.M., Grover, A., Herring, P.K., et al. (2021).         for batteries with machine learning. Nature
    Bayesian learning for rapid prediction of               578, 397–402.                                       4. Palacı́n, M.R., and De Guibert, A. (2016).
    lithium-ion battery-cycling protocols. Joule 5,                                                                Batteries: Why do batteries fail? Science 351.
    3187–3203.                                           3. Chen, B.R., Kunz, M.R., Tanim, T.R., and
                                                            Dufek, E.J. (2021). A machine learning              5. Weng, A., Mohtat, P., Attia, P.M., Sulzer, V.,
 2. Attia, P.M., Grover, A., Jin, N., Severson, K.A.,       framework for early detection of lithium               Lee, S., Less, G., and Stefanopoulou, A. (2021).
    Markov, T.M., Liao, Y.H., Chen, M.H., Cheong,           plating combining multiple physics-based               Predicting the impact of formation protocols




18    Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023
                                                                                                                                                                  ll
                                                                                                                                                            OPEN ACCESS
Article

    on battery lifetime immediately after                   20. Jones, P.K., Stimming, U., and Lee, A.A. (2022).              Herring, P.K., Fraggedakis, D., et al. (2019).
    manufacturing. Joule 5, 2971–2992.                          Impedance-based forecasting of battery                        Data-driven prediction of battery cycle life
                                                                performance amid uneven usage. Nat.                           before capacity degradation. Nat. Energy 4,
 6. Zhu, J., Xu, W., Knapp, M., Dewi Darma, M.S.,               Commun. 13, 4806.                                             383–391.
    Mereacre, L., Su, P., Hua, W., Liu-Théato, X.,
    Dai, H., Wei, X., et al. (2023). A method to            21. Zhu, J., Wang, Y., Huang, Y., Bhushan                     34. Vilsen, S.B., and Stroe, D.I. (2021). Battery state-
    prolong lithium-ion battery life during the full            Gopaluni, R., Cao, Y., Heere, M., Mühlbauer,                 of-health modelling by multiple linear
    life cycle. Cell Rep. Phys. Sci. 101464.                    M.J., Mereacre, L., Dai, H., Liu, X., et al. (2022).          regression. J. Clean. Prod. 290, 125700.
                                                                Data-driven capacity estimation of commercial
 7. Che, Y., Hu, X., Lin, X., Guo, J., and                      lithium-ion batteries from voltage relaxation.            35. Che, Y., Deng, Z., Tang, X., Lin, X., Nie, X., and
    Teodorescu, R. (2023). Health prognostics for               Nat. Commun. 13. 2261–10.                                     Hu, X. (2022). Lifetime and aging degradation
    lithium-ion batteries: mechanisms, methods,                                                                               prognostics for lithium-ion battery packs based
    and prospects. Energy Environ. Sci. 16,                 22. Meng, J., Cai, L., Stroe, D.I., Huang, X., Peng,              on a cell to pack method. ChinChin. J. Mech.
    338–371.                                                    J., Liu, T., and Teodorescu, R. (2022). An                    Eng. 35, 4.
                                                                Automatic Weak Learner Formulation for
 8. Börner, M.F., Frieges, M.H., Späth, B., Spütz,           Lithium-Ion Battery State of Health Estimation.           36. Sui, X., He, S., Meng, J., Teodorescu, R., and
    K., Heimes, H.H., Sauer, D.U., and Li, W. (2022).           IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 69, 2659–2668.                     Stroe, D.I. (2021). Fuzzy Entropy-Based State of
    Challenges of second-life concepts for retired                                                                            Health Estimation for Li-Ion Batteries. IEEE
    electric vehicle batteries. Cell Rep. Phys. Sci.        23. Che, Y., Deng, Z., Li, P., Tang, X., Khosravinia,             Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in
    3, 1–19.                                                    K., Lin, X., and Hu, X. (2022). State of health               Power Electronics 9, 5125–5137.
                                                                prognostics for series battery packs: A
 9. Ng, M.F., Zhao, J., Yan, Q., Conduit, G.J., and             universal deep learning method. Energy 238,               37. Tian, J., Xiong, R., Shen, W., Lu, J., and Sun, F.
    Seh, Z.W. (2020). Predicting the state of charge            121857.                                                       (2022). Flexible battery state of health and state
    and health of batteries using data-driven                                                                                 of charge estimation using partial charging
    machine learning. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2, 161–170.        24. Che, Y., Zheng, Y., Wu, Y., Sui, X., Bharadwaj,               data and deep learning. Energy Storage Mater.
                                                                P., Stroe, D.I., Yang, Y., Hu, X., and Teodorescu,            51, 372–381.
10. Harper, G., Sommerville, R., Kendrick, E.,                  R. (2022). Data efficient health prognostic for
    Driscoll, L., Slater, P., Stolkin, R., Walton, A.,          batteries based on sequential information-                38. Che, Y., Stroe, D.I., Hu, X., and Teodorescu, R.
    Christensen, P., Heidrich, O., Lambert, S., et al.          driven probabilistic neural network. Appl.                    (2023). Semi-supervised self-learning-based
    (2019). Recycling lithium-ion batteries from                Energy 323, 119663.                                           lifetime prediction for batteries. IEEE Trans.
    electric vehicles. Nature 575, 75–86.                                                                                     Ind. Inf. 19, 6471–6481.
                                                            25. Deng, Z., Hu, X., Xie, Y., Xu, L., Li, P., Lin, X., and
11. Kim, S., Yi, Z., Kunz, M.R., Dufek, E.J., Tanim,            Bian, X. (2022). Battery health evaluation using          39. Wei, Z., Ruan, H., Li, Y., Li, J., Zhang, C., and He,
    T.R., Chen, B.R., and Gering, K.L. (2022).                  a short random segment of constant current                    H. (2022). Multistage State of Health Estimation
    Accelerated battery life predictions through                charging. iScience 25, 104260.                                of Lithium-Ion Battery with High Tolerance to
    synergistic combination of physics-based                                                                                  Heavily Partial Charging. IEEE Trans. Power
    models and machine learning. Cell Rep. Phys.            26. Ruan, H., Chen, J., Ai, W., and Wu, B. (2022).
                                                                                                                              Electron. 37, 7432–7442.
    Sci. 3, 101023.                                             Generalised diagnostic framework for rapid
                                                                battery degradation quantification with deep              40. Liu, K., Peng, Q., Che, Y., Zheng, Y., Li, K.,
12. Reniers, J.M., Mulder, G., and Howey, D.A.                  learning. Energy and AI 9, 100158.                            Teodorescu, R., Widanage, D., and Barai, A.
    (2019). Review and Performance Comparison of                                                                              (2023). Transfer learning for battery smarter
    Mechanical-Chemical Degradation Models for              27. Tagade, P., Hariharan, K.S., Ramachandran, S.,
                                                                                                                              state estimation and ageing prognostics :
    Lithium-Ion Batteries. J. Electrochem. Soc. 166,            Khandelwal, A., Naha, A., Kolake, S.M., and
                                                                                                                              Recent progress , challenges , and
    A3189–A3200.                                                Han, S.H. (2020). Deep Gaussian process
                                                                                                                              prospects. Advances in Applied Energy 9,
                                                                regression for lithium-ion battery health
13. Li, J., Landers, R.G., and Park, J. (2020). A                                                                             100117.
                                                                prognosis and degradation mode diagnosis.
    comprehensive single-particle-degradation                   J. Power Sources 445, 227281.                             41. Ma, G., Xu, S., Yang, T., Du, Z., Zhu, L., Ding, H.,
    model for battery state-of-health prediction.
                                                            28. Wang, Z., Yuan, C., and Li, X. (2021). Lithium                and Yuan, Y. (2022). A Transfer Learning-Based
    J. Power Sources 456, 227950.
                                                                Battery State-of-Health Estimation via                        Method for Personalized State of Health
14. Hu, X., Xu, L., Lin, X., and Pecht, M. (2020).              Differential Thermal Voltammetry with                         Estimation of Lithium-Ion Batteries. IEEE Trans.
    Battery Lifetime Prognostics. Joule 4, 310–346.             Gaussian Process Regression. IEEE                             Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 1, 1–11.
                                                                Transactions on Transportation Electrification
15. Ali, M.U., Kallu, K.D., Masood, H., Niazi, K.A.K.,                                                                    42. Han, T., Wang, Z., and Meng, H. (2022). End-to-
                                                                7, 16–25.
    Alvi, M.J., Ghafoor, U., and Zafar, A. (2021).                                                                            end capacity estimation of Lithium-ion
    Kernel recursive least square tracker and long-         29. Feng, X., Weng, C., He, X., Han, X., Lu, L., Ren,             batteries with an enhanced long short-term
    short term memory ensemble based battery                    D., and Ouyang, M. (2019). Online State-of-                   memory network considering domain
    health prognostic model. iScience 24, 103286.               Health Estimation for Li-Ion Battery Using                    adaptation. J. Power Sources 520, 230823.
                                                                Partial Charging Segment Based on Support
16. Sun, Y., Ayalasomayajula, S.M., Deva, A., Lin,                                                                        43. Lu, J., Xiong, R., Tian, J., Wang, C., Sun, F., and
                                                                Vector Machine. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 68,
    G., and Garcı́a, R.E. (2022). Artificial intelligence                                                                     Tian, J. (2023). Deep learning to estimate
                                                                8583–8592.
    inferred microstructural properties from                                                                                  battery state of health without additional
    voltage–capacity curves. Sci. Rep. 12.                  30. Li, X., Wang, Z., and Yan, J. (2019). Prognostic              degradation experiments. Nat.
    13421–11.                                                   health condition for lithium battery using the                Commun. 1–13.
                                                                partial incremental capacity and Gaussian
17. Roman, D., Saxena, S., Robu, V., Pecht, M., and             process regression. J. Power Sources                      44. Li, S., He, H., Zhao, P., and Cheng, S. (2022).
    Flynn, D. (2021). Machine learning pipeline for             421, 56–67.                                                   Health-Conscious vehicle battery state
    battery state-of-health estimation. Nat. Mach.                                                                            estimation based on deep transfer learning.
    Intell. 3, 447–456.                                     31. Duan, Y., Tian, J., Lu, J., Wang, C., Shen, W.,               Appl. Energy 316, 119120.
                                                                and Xiong, R. (2021). Deep neural network
18. Zhang, Y., Tang, Q., Zhang, Y., Wang, J.,                   battery impedance spectra prediction by only              45. Tan, Y., and Zhao, G. (2020). Transfer
    Stimming, U., and Lee, A.A. (2020). Identifying             using constant-current curve. Energy Storage                  learning with long short-term memory
    degradation patterns of lithium ion batteries               Mater. 41, 24–31.                                             network for state-of-health prediction of
    from impedance spectroscopy using machine                                                                                 lithium-ion batteries. IEEE Trans. Ind.
    learning. Nat. Commun. 11. 1706–11.                     32. Tian, J., Xiong, R., Chen, C., Wang, C., Shen,                Electron. 67, 8723–8731.
                                                                W., and Sun, F. (2023). Simultaneous prediction
19. Gasper, P., Schiek, A., Smith, K., Shimonishi, Y.,          of impedance spectra and state for lithium-ion            46. Shu, X., Shen, J., Li, G., Zhang, Y., Chen, Z., and
    and Yoshida, S. (2022). Predicting battery                  batteries from short-term pulses. Electrochim.                Liu, Y. (2021). A Flexible State-of-Health
    capacity from impedance at varying                          Acta 449, 142218.                                             Prediction Scheme for Lithium-Ion Battery
    temperature and state of charge using                                                                                     Packs with Long Short-Term Memory Network
    machine learning. Cell Rep. Phys. Sci. 3,               33. Severson, K.A., Attia, P.M., Jin, N., Perkins, N.,            and Transfer Learning. IEEE Transactions on
    101184.                                                     Jiang, B., Yang, Z., Chen, M.H., Aykol, M.,                   Transportation Electrification 7, 2238–2248.



                                                                                                      Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023                19
             ll
      OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                                          Article

47. Che, Y., Deng, Z., Lin, X., Hu, L., and Hu, X.           forgetting in neural networks. Proc. Natl. Acad.           Deng, H.D., Thaman, H.L., et al. (2023).
    (2021). Predictive Battery Health Management             Sci. USA 114, 3521–3526.                                   Interpretable Data-Driven Modeling Reveals
    With Transfer Learning and Online Model                                                                             Complexity of Battery Aging. Preprint at
    Correction. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 70,            53. Kemker, R., McClure, M., Abitino, A., Hayes,               ChemRxiv.
    1269–1277.                                               T.L., and Kanan, C. (2018). Measuring
                                                             catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. In         59. Pozzato, G., Allam, A., Pulvirenti, L., Negoita,
48. Tang, X., Liu, K., Li, K., Widanage, W.D.,               32nd AAAI Conference on Artificial                         G.A., Paxton, W.A., and Onori, S. (2023).
    Kendrick, E., and Gao, F. (2021). Recovering             Intelligence, 201832nd AAAI Conference on                  Analysis and key findings from real-world
    large-scale battery aging dataset with machine           Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 3390–3398.             electric vehicle field data. Joule 7, 2035–2053.
    learning. Patterns 2, 100302.
                                                         54. Hadsell, R., Rao, D., Rusu, A.A., and Pascanu, R.      60. Deng, Z., Xu, L., Liu, H., Hu, X., Duan, Z.,
49. Sulzer, V., Mohtat, P., Aitio, A., Lee, S., Yeh,         (2020). Embracing Change: Continual Learning               and Xu, Y. (2023). Prognostics of battery
    Y.T., Steinbacher, F., Khan, M.U., Lee, J.W.,            in Deep Neural Networks. Trends Cogn. Sci.                 capacity based on charging data and data-
    Siegel, J.B., Stefanopoulou, A.G., and Howey,            24, 1028–1040.                                             driven methods for on-road vehicles. Appl.
    D.A. (2021). The challenge and opportunity of                                                                       Energy 339, 120954.
    battery lifetime prediction from field data.         55. Parisi, G.I., Kemker, R., Part, J.L., Kanan, C., and
    Joule 5, 1934–1955.                                      Wermter, S. (2019). Continual lifelong learning
                                                                                                                    61. Wang, S., Miao, H., Li, J., and Cao, J. (2022).
                                                             with neural networks: A review. Neural Netw.
50. Che, Y., Hu, X., and Teodorescu, R. (2023).                                                                         Spatio-Temporal Knowledge Transfer for
                                                             113, 54–71.
    Opportunities for battery aging mode                                                                                Urban Crowd Flow Prediction via Deep
    diagnosis of renewable energy storage. Joule         56. Du, M., Liu, N., and Hu, X. (2019). Techniques             Attentive Adaptation Networks. IEEE Trans.
    7, 1405–1407.                                            for interpretable machine learning. Commun.                Intell. Transport. Syst. 23, 4695–4705.
                                                             ACM 63, 68–77.
51. Che, Y., Zheng, Y., Sui, X., and Teodorescu, R.                                                                 62. Ghifary, M., Bastiaan Kleijn, W., and Zhang, M.
    (2023). Boosting battery state of health             57. Murdoch, W.J., Singh, C., Kumbier, K., Abbasi-             (2014). Domain adaptive neural networks for
    estimation based on self-supervised learning.            Asl, R., and Yu, B. (2019). Definitions, methods,          object recognition. Lect. Notes Comput. Sci.
    J. Energy Chem. 84, 335–346.                             and applications in interpretable machine                  8862, 898–904.
                                                             learning. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 116, 22071–
52. Kirkpatrick, J., Pascanu, R., Rabinowitz, N.,            22080.                                                 63. Tzeng, E., Hoffman, J., Zhang, N., Saenko, K.,
    Veness, J., Desjardins, G., Rusu, A.A., Milan, K.,                                                                  and Darrell, T. (2014). Deep Domain Confusion:
    Quan, J., Ramalho, T., Grabska-Barwinska, A.,        58. Vlijmen, B.V., Asinger, P.A., Lam, V., Cui, X.,            Maximizing for Domain Invariance. Preprint at
    et al. (2017). Overcoming catastrophic                   Sun, S., Herring, P.K., Balaji, C., Geise, N.,             arXiv.




20     Cell Reports Physical Science 4, 101743, December 20, 2023
