                                                                                                                             ll
                                                                                                                      OPEN ACCESS



Article
Gaussian process-based online health
monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion
battery systems from field data
                                                                                         Joachim Schaeffer, Eric Lenz,
                                                                                         Duncan Gulla, Martin Z. Bazant,
                                                                                         Richard D. Braatz, Rolf Findeisen

                                                                                         rolf.findeisen@iat.tu-darmstadt.de

                                                                                         Highlights
                                                                                         Recursive spatiotemporal
                                                                                         Gaussian processes are applied to
                                                                                         lithium-ion battery field data

                                                                                         Online fault probabilities based
                                                                                         on the resistance estimates are
                                                                                         developed

                                                                                         The results provide insights into
                                                                                         how battery systems degrade and
                                                                                         fail in the field

                                                                                         We publish the BattGP Python
                                                                                         library and the dataset comprising
                                                                                         28 battery systems




Improving battery safety is important to safeguard life and strengthen trust in
lithium-ion batteries. Schaeffer et al. develop fault probabilities based on recursive
spatiotemporal Gaussian processes, showing how batteries degrade and fail while
publishing code and field data from 28 battery systems to benefit the community.




                                                                                         Schaeffer et al., Cell Reports Physical Science 5,
                                                                                         102258
                                                                                         November 20, 2024 ª 2024 The Author(s).
                                                                                         Published by Elsevier Inc.
                                                                                         https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258
 Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
 tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




                                                                                                                                              ll
                                                                                                                                     OPEN ACCESS



Article
Gaussian process-based online health monitoring
and fault analysis of lithium-ion
battery systems from field data
Joachim Schaeffer,1,2 Eric Lenz,1 Duncan Gulla,1 Martin Z. Bazant,2,3 Richard D. Braatz,2
and Rolf Findeisen1,4,*


SUMMARY
Health monitoring, fault analysis, and detection methods are impor-
tant to operate battery systems safely. We apply Gaussian process
resistance models on lithium-iron-phosphate (LFP) battery field
data to separate the time-dependent and operating-point-depen-
dent resistances. The dataset contains 28 battery systems returned
to the manufacturer for warranty, each with eight cells in series,
totaling 224 cells and 133 million data rows. We develop probabi-
listic fault detection rules using recursive spatiotemporal Gaussian
processes. These processes scale linearly with the number of data
points, allowing online monitoring. The fault analysis underlines
that often, only a single cell shows abnormal behavior or a knee
point, consistent with weakest-link failure for cells connected in
series, amplified by local resistive heating. The results further the
understanding of how battery packs degrade and fail in the field
and demonstrate the potential of online monitoring. We open
source the code and publish the dataset with this article.

INTRODUCTION
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are essential for electric vehicles (EVs), grid storage,
mobile applications, consumer electronics, and more. Over the last 30 years,
remarkable advances have led to long-lasting cells with high energy efficiency and
density.1 The growth of production volume over the last decade is projected to
continue2,3 mainly due to EVs and stationary storage, both needed for the transition
to a sustainable future. Safe operation of LIBs is vital to protect life and property and
strengthen trust in LIBs. In the past, LIB fires erupted in many different applications,
including EVs,4 stationary storage,5 and electric bicycles.6 Monitoring batteries dur-
ing operation is important to have a chance of detecting electrical or mechanical
abuse of the system or the onset of accelerated cell degradation, which is critical
to reducing the potential of such fires.                                                                 1Control and Cyber-Physical Systems Laboratory

                                                                                                         Technical, University of Darmstadt, 64289
                                                                                                         Darmstadt, Germany
This article considers the design of Gaussian process (GP)-based health monitoring                       2Department of Chemical Engineering,
from battery field data, which are time series data consisting of noisy temperature,                     Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
current, and voltage measurements corresponding to the system, module, and cell                          Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
levels.7 In real-world applications, the operational conditions are usually uncon-                       3Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts

                                                                                                         Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139,
trolled, i.e., the device is in the hands of the customer, who can use and potentially                   USA
abuse the battery system. From a high level, the key task for the battery manage-                        4Lead contact

ment system (BMS) is to ensure the safe operation of the battery system,8 either                         *Correspondence:
onboard or potentially also leveraging the cloud9 if further investigations                              rolf.findeisen@iat.tu-darmstadt.de
or compute power are needed. Field data are critical for improving BMSs,                                 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258



                                      Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024 ª 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc.         1
                                              This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
    Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
    tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




              ll
        OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                              Article

understanding how batteries age in the field, and detecting faults early under
realistic battery operating conditions.7,10 Furthermore, openly available health
monitoring algorithms and software are important for regulation. One example is
the battery passport.2 A critical bottleneck in pushing the field of battery monitoring
forward has been the lack of published battery field data.11 Open sourcing of the
code and data is a key contribution of this article.

Many methods are available for modeling the cycling and degradation behavior of
battery cells and systems.12–14 Roughly, these battery models can be categorized
as empirical models,15,16 machine learning models,17–22 first-principles models
(also known as [aka] physics-based aka mechanistic),23–25 and hybrid models, which
combine first-principles and machine learning models.26,27 Choosing an appro-
priate model is essential to optimally using the available data.12 Physics-based bat-
tery models such as pseudo-two-dimensional (P2D) and single-particle models
(SPMs) are challenging to parameterize with field data where often no or only a
few physical cell parameters are known in combination with sensor noise and bias
as well as low time resolution. Equivalent circuit models (ECMs) are an alternative
because they are easier to parameterize with limited data13 and are applicable to
field data.28

Faults are abnormal events that cause the system to behave in an unintended way or
stop operating. Battery system faults can be auxiliary, sensor, or battery faults.
Furthermore, faults can potentially cause safety threats to a system and its environ-
ment, emphasizing the importance of monitoring and early fault detection. Fault
detection methods can be categorized as signal based or model based. Much
research considers fast signal-based fault detection for battery systems.29–31 A few
examples of commonly used methods include normalized voltage-based
methods,32 analysis of correlation coefficients of cell voltages,33,34 and sample en-
tropy-based methods.35

Model-based fault detection methods are complementary to signal-based fault
detection. While model-based fault detection methods are usually computationally
more complex and slower, they can potentially detect certain faults earlier and
improve robustness.36–42 In particular, battery system faults, which are often due
to slow processes, such as battery degradation, can be addressed by a model to es-
timate the state of health (SOH) of batteries.28,43,44 It is commonly observed that
slow capacity decay is followed by accelerated degradation, yielding a knee-shaped
capacity decay curve as a function of charge throughput.45 Consequently, the cell
will behave very differently from the remaining cells.

In this work, we analyze and model the resistance of each cell in LIB systems based on
field data. We build on a hybrid approach of using GPs and ECMs developed by Aitio
et al. for single-cell lead-acid batteries28 and adapt the model to lithium-iron-phos-
phate (LFP) battery systems. This hybrid approach approximates two decoupled
series resistances, i.e., an operational point-dependent resistance and a tempera-
ture-dependent resistance.28 First, we show exact GP results using 40,000 data
points for each cell. Next, we show recursive spatiotemporal GP28,46–48 results based
on all selected data points, resulting in millions of analyzed data points in total. We
then develop fault probabilities, allowing us to monitor the homogeneity of cell re-
sistances and the probability of a single cell exceeding a maximum resistance
threshold, which are important for detecting the onset of different types of battery
system faults. The derivations are motivated by field data from 28 portable LIB
systems consisting of eight cells in series, totaling 224 cells that were in use for up


2       Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024
 Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
 tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




                                                                                                                                           ll
                                                                                                                                     OPEN ACCESS
Article

                                             BMS




Figure 1. Battery system
Sketch of 8 prismatic cells in gray, with temperature sensors in red. The temperature sensors are
shared by two cells.



to 5 years. All analyzed systems were returned to the manufacturer for warranty
claims, where the data were recovered. Analyzing the dataset and modeling results
furthers the understanding of how these battery packs fail. This article makes the
field data and associated Python package BattGP available as open source. This da-
taset can be used to develop and test approaches for SOH estimation, fault detec-
tion, and health monitoring. We hope the battery modeling community will use this
dataset for further development. To the authors’ knowledge, this is one of the first
large publicly available LIB field dataset containing data from many independent
systems and multiple years of operation that allows us to study faults. Recently,
another large battery field data set was published by Figgener et al.49 The study
by Figgener et al. focuses on capacity fade, whereas this article’s data set is from bat-
tery systems that degraded and had faulty behavior. The two data sets thus comple-
ment each other.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Battery system and field dataset
The dataset contains data from 28 portable 24 V LFP battery systems with approxi-
mately 160 Ah nominal capacity. Each system’s specific use case is unknown, but
battery systems of this size are typically used as power sources for recreational vehi-
cles, solar energy storage, and more.

All battery systems in this dataset showed some form of unsatisfactory behavior and
were returned to the manufacturer. Many reasons can cause a consumer to return a
battery to the manufacturer for maintenance. The user’s individual decisions may be
motivated by personal judgment, BMS warnings, or customer support advice. This
dataset comprises a very small fraction of batteries sold of this version. Therefore,
this dataset is biased and not representative of the operational data of the entire
population of this system version. This article’s battery system type was replaced
with an improved version. The battery system manufacturer provided the dataset
for this study and allowed its open-source release under the condition of anonymity.

Some time series contain data gaps, either because the system was fully switched
off, the user tampered with it and its data storage unit, or for other unknown reasons.
Furthermore, the exact manufacturing and shipping dates are unavailable, making it
impossible to precisely reconstruct charge throughput and rest period durations for
all systems.


                                                                                      Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024          3
    Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
    tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




               ll
        OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                              Article

Table 1. System and data specifications
Technical specification
Nominal voltage                                                                          24 V
Nominal capacity                                                                         z160 Ah
No. of cells                                                                             8 (series)
No. of current sensors                                                                   1
No. of voltage sensors                                                                   9
No. of temperature sensors                                                               4
No. of cell balancing current sensors                                                    8
Dataset
No. of systems                                                                           28
Total number of cells                                                                    224
Total rows of data                                                                       133 M
Median of measurement intervals                                                          5s



Each battery system consists of 8 prismatic cells in series. Each system has one load
current sensor, and each cell has one voltage sensor. The four temperature sensors
are placed between adjacent cells, i.e., each temperature sensor is shared by two
cells (Figure 1). Furthermore, the battery systems have active cell balancing. The
available measurements for the systems vary from a single month to 5 years. Conse-
quently, the number of data rows per system varies from several thousand to mil-
lions, depending on the duration of battery operation. The dataset contains a total
of 133 million rows of measurements (Table 1).

The estimated probability densities of usage conditions (Figure 2) demonstrate the
widely varying operational conditions. For example, many temperature measure-
ments are below room temperature, suggesting that some systems were operated
outdoors or in unheated environments. The observed depth of discharges (DODs)
are predominantly limited to the upper half of the state of charge (SOC) range,
and much time was spent fully charged for most systems. The distribution of voltage
shows that some batteries were overcharged (>3.6 V), undercharged (<2.0 V), or
both at some point. Furthermore, battery systems 3, 4, and 16 have discharge cur-
rent outliers >1,000 A, suggesting a shortcut or inrush current due to improper
installation, abuse, or a sensor error. It is not possible to further disentangle the rea-
sons for these abnormally high discharge currents and over-/undercharging. There is
a lot of uncertainty associated with how the user installed the system and which
equipment was connected because the systems are portable and suitable for
many different applications.

Exemplary data visualization and analysis
We analyze 24.2 million rows of data associated with battery system 8, which
was operated for approximately 5 years (Figure 3). The system was switched on in
November 2016, but frequent usage only started about a year later. The end of
continuous usage is around December 2021. However, the system kept logging
data for a couple more months afterward. The temperature profile shows
seasonal variations, with higher temperatures during the Northern hemisphere’s
summer months. Furthermore, voltage measurements and estimated SOC show
that the system was primarily operated between 60% to 100% SOC, with occasional
discharges below 40%. Around September 2020, the usage pattern changes, as can
be seen by the current and SOC patterns. The mean subtracted cell voltages,

                                                        1 X    n
                                 u~i ðtÞ = ui ðtÞ                uj ðtÞ;               (Equation 1)
                                                      n  1 j;jsi



4       Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024
 Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
 tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




                                                                                                                                           ll
                                                                                                                                     OPEN ACCESS
Article

          A                                                                   B




          C                                                                   D




Figure 2. PDF estimates for each system
Log probability density function (log-PDF) of current (A), log-PDF of cell voltages (B), log-PDF of SOC (C), and PDF of temperatures (D).



where ui(t) is the voltage of cell i at time t and n is the number of cells, show
average deviations below 0.1 V for the first 2 years of operation (Figure 3B).
With increasing usage, i.e., increasing charge throughput and time and therefore
also degradation, the average mean subtracted voltages increase, an indicator
that individual cells age differently, likely due to cell-to-cell variations,50,51 and
as a consequence, the system is less balanced. Similarly, the voltage standard
deviations,
               sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
                     1 X         n                                      X
                                                                      1 n
      su ðtÞ =                        ðui ðtÞ  mðtÞÞ2 ; where mðtÞ =       ui ðtÞ; (Equation 2)
                 n  1 i=1                                            n i=1

are below 0.05 V for the first years; however, toward the end of use, the standard de-
viation of cell voltages increases significantly.




                                                                                      Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024          5
    Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
    tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




              ll
        OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                              Article




Figure 3. Data visualization of battery system 8
(A) Cell voltages.
(B) Cell voltages with mean of other cells subtracted.
(C) Cell voltage standard deviation.
(D) Battery system current.
(E) Cell balancing converter current.
(F) State of charge.
(G) Temperatures (each temperature sensor neighbors two cells; see Figure 1).
(H) Data availability.
Figures S10–S37 show the data visualization for all systems.



To summarize, the data analysis of system 8 shows heavy usage over a 5-year period,
totaling about 1,531 equivalent full cycles. However, based on the data visualization,
it is challenging to further understand how cells degraded, whether certain cells


6       Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024
 Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
 tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




                                                                                                                                           ll
                                                                                                                                     OPEN ACCESS
Article




Figure 4. Visualization of the ECM and GP kernels
ECM with two series resistors and illustrations of random draws from the corresponding kernel
functions. The radial basis function kernel depends on current, SOC, and temperature, and the
Wiener velocity kernel depends on time, as suggested by Aitio et al. 28



degraded more than others, or when the system might fail. Next, we explore how to
use the battery data for internal state estimation suitable for tracking the aging
behavior of the individual cells.

GP equivalent circuit battery systems modeling
GPs are suitable for modeling the time- and operating point behavior of batteries.28
GPs, f ðxÞ  GPðmðxÞ;kðx;x 0 ÞÞ, are nonparametric probabilistic models defining a dis-
tribution of functions. GPs are defined by a mean function mðxÞ and a covariance func-
tion kðx; x 0 Þ, where x; x 0 ˛ X D and X D is the input space with dimension D. The
modeled response y follows a Gaussian distribution, as does any marginal distribu-
tion.52 GPs are a flexible modeling framework excelling in the case of limited data by
making a point estimate and modeling the covariance associated with the prediction.

We base our analysis on a GP-ECM model that uses an ECM consisting of two series
resistors modeled by two additive kernels (Figure 4).28 For simplicity, we do not
include resistor-capacitor (RC) circuit elements in the model; however, extending
GP-ECM models to include RC circuit elements is an active research area.48 Here,
the first resistor is modeled by a radial basis function (RBF) kernel taking the current,
SOC, and temperature as inputs and is, therefore, only dependent on the operating
point of the battery. The resulting RBF function estimates are infinitely many times
differentiable and thus smooth, in agreement with what is expected experimentally
(see Anseán et al.53 and Figure S1). A non-stationary Wiener velocity (WV) kernel
models the second series resistor and depends only on time, based on the assump-
tion that the time-dependent resistance will only increase due to degradation. See
Duvenaud54 for more information on kernels. The underlying assumption of this
‘‘R-R’’ model is that the operating-point-dependent equivalent circuit internal resis-
tance and time-dependent resistance are additive. This assumption, while not
exactly fulfilled by LIBs, is reasonable, allowing us to approximate and extract the
equivalent circuit time-dependent resistance, i.e., a proxy of degradation.

In addition, the open-circuit voltage (OCV) curve is needed. However, no precise OCV
curve was available for the battery cells under consideration. Therefore, we linearly
approximate the OCV plateau region of LFP (Figure S2). Physically, the linear OCV
model approximates the distribution of particle-size-dependent nucleation barriers55
for a porous electrode with a particular distribution of LFP particle sizes.56 In practice,
any deviation from the true OCV will lead to a biased resistance; however, this bias is
only a function of SOC and will, therefore, affect mainly the SOC dimension of the RBF
kernel (Figure S1). Furthermore, even if a precisely measured OCV would be available
at the beginning of life, the OCV is expected to change with degradation.


                                                                                      Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024          7
    Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
    tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




              ll
        OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                              Article




8       Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024
 Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
 tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




                                                                                                                                            ll
                                                                                                                                      OPEN ACCESS
Article

Figure 5. Time-dependent resistance estimates from Wiener velocity kernel
Evaluation of the time-dependent Wiener velocity kernel equivalent circuit resistance for up to 40,000 randomly selected data points after
downselection. Only systems for which >2,000 data points after downselection are available are shown (21 systems). Each subplot shows the equivalent
circuit resistance for each cell, with the reference operating point set to 15 A, 90% SOC, and 25  C (top); the average daily temperature of all sensors
(middle); and a logarithmically scaled bar plot in red visualizing the available data (bottom). The results are described in more detail in Table 2.


An advantage of using a GP in comparison to other ways of filtering or smoothing
the resistances is that the GP framework allows separating the time-dependent resis-
tance from the operating-point-dependent resistance. The GP estimated resis-
tances might not be identical to the internal cell resistance; see Islam et al.57 for a
discussion. However, here we are mainly concerned with monitoring changes in
the time-dependent battery resistance.

The GP-ECM algorithm consists of the following steps for a single cell. First, voltage,
current, SOC, and time are extracted and downselected. The aim is to select data
points with significant information for the learning tasks and to avoid sparse extreme
conditions where few data are available or the simple R-R model is less suitable. We
use discharging sections only because, in the dataset, there are more dynamics dur-
ing discharging. Further selection criteria outlined in the experimental procedures
section are applied to limit the considered SOC window, discharge current range,
and temperature conditions (Table 3). We selected the latest section with no gaps
longer than 100 days and required at least 2000 valid data points, resulting in a se-
lection of 21 systems for modeling.

Based on the pack layout, eight cells in series, and one parallel string (8s1p), we
generate a model for each cell, resulting in eight models for each battery system.
We use exact GPs to get an overview of the dataset but move to recursive spatio-
temporal GPs in the next section for online monitoring (see the experimental pro-
cedures section for more details). To keep the space and computational
complexity feasible for the exact GP, we further downselect each cell to a
maximum of 40,000 measurements by selecting data with linearly spaced indices
of the preselected data. The hyperparameters are optimized as outlined in the
experimental procedures section. Identical hyperparameters are used for all bat-
tery systems because the hyperparameters characterize the system behavior,
and all systems are identical in construction. Even though the batteries were oper-
ated in different applications with different average operating points, GPs can
handle these differences. The GP inference takes, on average, 11 s per cell on
an NVIDIA A100 GPU using 40,000 data points.

The GP modeling results (Figure 5) show the time-dependent resistance modeled by
the WV kernel at the same reference operating point for all systems (15 A, 90%
SOC, 25 C). Table 2 gives an overview of the equivalent full cycle count, available
data, section length modeled by the GP, and intriguing cells. In addition, Table 2 de-
scribes the modeling results for each system in more detail. Further modeling results
that use the mean of each system’s selected data as a reference operating point (Fig-
ure S9) support the conclusions in Table 2.

Systems 6, 8, and 21 show a high range of operating temperatures, likely due
to seasonal temperature variations. These variations pose challenges for the
GP framework because the WV kernel resistance estimates are affected by the
temperature variations, with lower temperatures leading to higher resistance
estimates.53,58 Consequently, using the resistance time derivative for fore-
casting as suggested by Aitio et al.28 for lead-acid batteries appears challenging
for LIBs.


                                                                                       Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024         9
     Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
     tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




               ll
         OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                                      Article

Table 2. Overview of GP modeling results
Subplot,            Equivalent       Max age        GP section        Intriguing
system ID           full cycles      (days)         (days)            cells            Comments
a, 1                14               1,402          580               7                cell 7 behaves differently from the other cells
b, 2                6                982            204               6, 8             cells 6 and 8 show a slightly higher resistance than the other cells
c, 3                11               160            54                7                cell 7 shows an upward resistance trend, while other cells have fairly
                                                                                       constant resistances
d, 4                185              528            176               1                cell 1 shows an upward resistance trend, while other cells have fairly
                                                                                       constant resistances
e, 5                29               2,166          44                –                flat resistances; cell 1 shows a slightly higher resistance than the other
                                                                                       cells when the mean of the selected data is used as a reference point
                                                                                       (see Figure S9)
f, 6a               1,446a           1,352a         1,113a            8a               cell 8 has a slightly higher resistance than the other cells and shows a
                                                                                       resistance knee after 3 yearsa
g, 7                15               428            122               5, 7, 8          cells 5, 7, and 8 show different trends in comparison to the other cells
h, 8a               1,531a           1,923a         1,476a            –                all cells show a resistance increase close to the end of the available
                                                                                       data; seasonal temperature variations are affecting resistance
                                                                                       estimatesa
i, 9a               489a             534a           322a              2a               after approximately 230 days, cell 2 shows a knee-shaped resistance
                                                                                       increasea
j, 10a              211a             417a           241a              7, 8a            cell 8 shows an increasing resistance after 100 days; cell 7 behaves
                                                                                       slightly differently from the other cellsa
k, 11               15               997            185               –                lower average current than most other systems; unclear interpretation
l, 12               93               320            71                8, 7             cells 8 and 7 show different behavior (see also Figure S9); significantly
                                                                                       higher temperatures were measured by temperature sensor 4 (see
                                                                                       Figure S21)
m, 13               23               724            183               –                lower average current than most other systems; unclear interpretation
n, 14               23               376            117               1                cell 1 shows a lower resistance to the other cells
o, 15               17               1,217          187               –                many data gaps; unclear interpretation
p, 16               34               408            332               4                cell 4 shows a lower resistance to the other cells
q, 17               21               889            218               3                cell 3 shows a much higher resistance to the other cells
r, 18a              453a             301a           182a              –                all cells show increasing resistance toward the end of use; unclear
                                                                                       interpretationa
s, 19               28               712            185               –                lower average current than most other systems; unclear interpretation
t, 20               22               724            183               –                lower average current than most other systems; unclear interpretation
u, 21a              1,088a           779a           377a              –                all cells show increasing resistance toward the end of use; unclear
                                                                                       interpretation; temperature variations affect resistance estimatesa
a
    These systems have the highest equivalent full cycle count and are analyzed further.



For ten systems (1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 12, 14, 16, 17), a single cell or two cells
behave differently than the remaining cells (Figure 5; Table 2). A single cell shows
a knee-shaped resistance behavior for four systems (3, 4, 6, 9). Battery system 8
shows an increasing resistance trajectory for all cells at roughly the same time. Sys-
tems 6, 8, and 9 have a high equivalent full cycle count (1,446, 1,531, and 489). Their
resistance trajectories suggest that these systems were healthy for most of their
operation, with degradation accelerating toward the end of use.

These resistance patterns can have a wide variety of root causes. To further under-
stand the cause of individual degradation, a mechanical inspection of the systems
would be needed, which cannot be done because the returned battery systems
are not physically available to the authors. Furthermore, the model cannot distin-
guish between battery degradation, external degradation, or faults such as
connector loss, corrosion, connector resistance increase, etc. Learning the battery
operating-point-dependent equivalent resistance can be challenging with few
data, resulting in larger uncertainty bands. In addition, the output scale parameter
of the WV kernel was optimized to track battery degradation (cf., experimental pro-
cedures section). Therefore, it can be challenging for the GP to quickly capture sud-
den faults such as connector loss or others (see Note S4 and Figures S5–S7 for more


10       Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024
 Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
 tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




                                                                                                                                           ll
                                                                                                                                     OPEN ACCESS
Article

details), emphasizing that this method is complementary to faster signal-based fault
detection methods.

The operating characteristics, i.e., R(I, SOC, T), modeled by the RBF kernel
(Figure S1), are consistent with physical expectations and experimental data from
Anseán et al.53 The current-dependent resistance shows a downward trend with
increasing discharge current.59,60 The SOC-dependent resistance is fairly flat.
Some unexpected small upward and downward trends can be attributed to the
linear pseudo-OCV (Figure S2). The temperature characteristics show increasing
resistance at low and very high temperatures, in line with physical expectations.
For a more detailed discussion, see Note S1.


Fault probabilities
Based on the observations on the entire dataset, we investigate how the six systems
with the highest equivalent full cycle count (systems 6, 8, 9, 10, 18, and 21)
degraded.

Often, only a single cell deviates from the remaining cells (see Table 2; Figure 5).
Therefore, we propose defining a battery pack consisting of cells in series to have
an acceptable resistance distribution if the internal resistances of each cell are within
a resistance band centered around a robust estimate of the mean of the other cells.
We use the Hodge-Lehman estimator61 to estimate the location (i.e., the mean) of
cell resistances. The Hodge-Lehman estimator is defined as the median of the
mean of all possible pairs of cell resistances, including self-pairs,

                                      Si = f1; 2; .; ng\fig                          (Equation 3)


                    b                   Rj ðtÞ+Rk ðtÞ
                    q Ri ðtÞ = medj % k              ; j; k ˛ Si ;                   (Equation 4)
                                              2
where n = 8, the number of cells. The probability of a cell i to be outside a resistance
band that is 2b wide is

         pðFRi ðtÞÞ = pðRi ðtÞ > b
                                 q Ri ðtÞ + bÞ + pðRi ðtÞ < b
                                                            q Ri ðtÞ  bÞ:           (Equation 5)
The GP provides the mean and probabilities needed to calculate pðFRi ðtÞÞ. We pro-
pose defining the probability of a pack resistance fault, pðFRp Þ, as
                                 Y                  
                p FRp ðtÞ = 1        1  pðFRi ðtÞðiÞÞ               (Equation 6)
                                           i

according to the true ‘‘weakest link’’ failure statistics for cells connected in se-
ries.62–64 In the limit of failures dominated by a single cell, the pack resistance fault
can be approximated by
                                          
                                  p FRp ðtÞ zmaxi pðFRi ðtÞÞ:               (Equation 7)

Similarly, battery packs can be faulty or at the end of their life if cells exceed an upper
resistance threshold,

                                  pðFRmi ðtÞÞ = pðRi ðtÞ > cÞ                        (Equation 8)

                                         Y                   
                    pðFRm ðtÞÞ = 1            1  pðFRmi ðtÞÞ :                     (Equation 9)
                                           i

However, in the following analysis, we only focus on the resistance distribution because
the resistance at t = 0 differs significantly between systems (Figure 5). The different use
cases, with different operating conditions of the systems, can affect the operational


                                                                                      Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024      11
 Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
 tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




            ll
      OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                               Article

 A                                                                              B




 C                                                                              D




 E                                                                              F




Figure 6. Online forward fault probabilities
Resistance distribution-based fault probabilities for each cell in different colors. Variance of the GP resistance mean in black. Systems 6, 8, 9, 10, 18, and
21 are shown. These systems have the highest equivalent full cycle count. The GP fault probabilities after applying the Rauch-Tung-Striebel smoother
are shown in Figure S8.


characteristics learned by the RBF kernel (Figure S1) and lead to such variations. How to
address this issue remains an open question for further research.

In an online setting, the ECM-GP needs to be updated continuously as new data arrive.
The computational complexity of exact GPs scale with Oðn3 Þ, where n is the number of
data points, making it computationally infeasible to update the model continuously us-
ing all selected data. Therefore, we use a recursive spatiotemporal GP, which scales lin-
early with the number of data points,28,46,47 allowing the processing of millions of data
points on a laptop computer suitable for use in embedded BMS systems or efficient cal-
culations in the cloud for thousands of systems. Our approach is motivated by the
approach developed by Aitio et al.28 but is not identical. A detailed description of the
approach, as well as details on computation time, are given in the experimental proced-
ures section. The spatiotemporal GP walks forward in time using a Kalman filter.

We use the estimate of the Kalman filter at time tk, which only depends on data up to
time tk to calculate the fault probabilities (Figure 6; see Figure S6 for the correspond-
ing spatiotemporal GP resistance estimates). We set b = 0:55 mU based on the
resistance spread observed at the beginning of the life of the batteries for the inves-
tigated systems. The forward fault probabilities (Figure 6) fluctuate more than the GP
fault probabilities (Figure S8), which is expected because they only depend on past
data. In particular, the forward fault probabilities need a certain amount of data to
settle in, here in the order of 30–200 days, depending on the usage of the system.
During this initial period, the GP learns the operating point characteristics of the sys-
tems (Figure S1). Pre-initializing the matrices of the spatiotemporal GP based on lab-
oratory test data could mitigate this issue. However, here we do not have access to
the physical systems, and the systems were operated in very different ways; there-
fore, pre-initialization is an open question for future work.


12    Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024
 Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
 tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




                                                                                                                                           ll
                                                                                                                                     OPEN ACCESS
Article

System 6: the fault probability of cell 8 is significantly higher than that of the other
cells even after the Kalman filter settled in after approximately 200 days. After
500 days, the fault probability of cell 8 starts increasing and crosses 0.5 shortly
before 800 days. The remaining cells have a very low fault probability. After
900 days, the fault probabilities of cell 3, the cell with the lowest estimated resis-
tance, increases, too.

System 8: the mean resistances associated with system 8 show seasonal variations
(Figure 5H) with higher resistance estimates at lower temperatures despite having
a fixed temperature to the operating point. Around 1,100–1,200 days, multiple
cell resistance fault probabilities and the weakest link statistic increase sharply,
coinciding with the lower temperatures. Around 1,300 days, the weakest link statistic
reaches values close to 1, agreeing with the increasing spread between cell
resistances. To summarize, system 8 reached an equivalent full cycle count of
1,531 cycles, with seasonal temperature variations but a long-term upward resis-
tance trend with increasingly inhomogeneous resistance as commonly observed
by cell-to-cell variability.50

System 9: the fault probabilities increase quickly around day 250 for cell 2. In
contrast, the other cells have a low fault probability, except for cell 1, which might
be affected because it shares a temperature sensor with cell 2.

System 10: the fault probabilities do not settle in. In particular, the resistance prob-
ability of cell 8 increases again after 120 days. The fault probabilities suggest that
there was an issue early on, in line with the end of use after 211 equivalent full cycles
(Table 2).

System 18: the fault probabilities settle in after around 30 days, with only minor
fluctuations afterward and some peaks for cell 8 toward the end of use. No clear
conclusion is reached by this analysis. .

System 21: the fault probabilities settle in after 50 days. The fault probabilities of
cells 1, 2, and 3 increase temporarily around 100–140 days. The fault probabilities
of cell 1 increase again after 330. Given the mostly flat and only slightly increasing
resistance trend toward the end of use for this system (Figures 5 and S6), no clear
conclusion can be reached from it.

The proposed fault probabilities are suitable for analyzing field data and online
monitoring. However, a couple of challenges remain, in particular how to mitigate
the influence of seasonal temperature variations on the WV kernel and reduce the
time it takes for the Kalman filter to settle in. Further investigations are needed to
determine how suitable the proposed approach is for the early detection of specific
fault types. For example, thermal runaway, the most safety-critical fault, can have
different causes. If the cause is abrupt physical damage to the battery, a GP-based
approach might struggle to capture it quickly. For such a case, purely signal-based
approaches are more suitable because speed is the most important factor. However,
if the cause of thermal runaway is slow degradation with partial electrode dry-out
and dendrite growth, then there is a chance that such a thermal runaway trigger
can be picked up in the resistance change and resistance distribution. The proposed
fault probabilities can be used for fault detection; this would require the following:
first, a reference operating point; second, a fault probability threshold; third, a
band b; and fourth, an upper threshold c. These values should be chosen based
on the application and system characteristics, such as cell balancing design, pack


                                                                                      Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024      13
 Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
 tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




              ll
      OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                           Article

Table 3. Data selection criteria
Charging/discharging                                                            Discharge only
Temperature ( C)                                                               10 < x < 100
Current (A)                                                                       80 < x <  5
SOC (%)                                                                         40 < x < 95


layout, and cell-to-cell variability. We did not carry out fault detection because the
specific fault types and times are unknown for this dataset.

To summarize, health monitoring, fault analysis, and detection methods are
important for the safe operation of battery systems. We use a recursive and exact
GP electrical circuit modeling pipeline to analyze faults from field data with measure-
ment noise without precise knowledge of the OCV. The estimated time-dependent
equivalent circuit internal resistance is one possible SOH metric for LIB packs.
Furthermore, we developed resistance fault probabilities using the individual cell
resistance of the cells in a pack, which is suitable for early online monitoring and
could be extended into a fault detection framework. The methods are motivated
and tested on a large field dataset comprising 28 battery systems and 133 million
data rows. The results show that often, a single cell with abnormal performance
can cause the end of a system’s use and suggest that such faults can be detected
with the proposed GP electrical circuit modeling approach. Such an occurrence
can be caused after heavy use due to degradation or other issues. Furthermore,
the results support that if a cell has a higher resistance early on, then this can already
be an indicator that this cell will age faster than the remaining cells. Physically, this
could occur by enhanced resistive heating of the most degraded cell, thereby accel-
erating its degradation,65 which has been observed in the case of LIBs connected in
series.66 Last, the results suggest that, for larger battery packs, advanced pack
layouts that allow the permanent bypass of a more strongly degraded cell can be
advantageous in prolonging the life of a system. We outlined several remaining
research challenges. To conclude, this analysis furthers the understanding of how
batteries degrade and fail in the field and demonstrates the potential of online moni-
toring. We publish the dataset associated with this article and the software, BattGP,
making data and tools for analyzing and modeling battery field data available to the
community.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Data selection
The data selection criteria (Table 3) are applied to each cell individually.

GPs
GPs are a flexible modeling framework excelling in the case of limited data by mak-
ing a point estimate and modeling the covariance associated with the prediction.
GPs are nonparametric probabilistic models fully defined by a mean function mðxÞ
and a covariance function kðx; x 0 Þ, where x; x 0 ˛ X D . A GP is usually written as

                                   f ðxÞ  GPðmðxÞ; kðx; x 0 ÞÞ;                   (Equation 10)
making it explicit that GPs describe a distribution of functions. The GP posterior
predictions are normally distributed, i.e., any marginal distribution of the GP is
Gaussian. Furthermore, all joint distributions associated with a finite number of
elements of the index set are multivariate normal distributions. See Williams and
Rasmussen52 for further information. Assuming that we have no noisy observations
ðxo;i ; yo;i Þ with yo;i = f ðxo;i Þ + ei , where ei is Gaussian noise with variance s2n , the
predictive GP equations are


14    Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024
 Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
 tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




                                                                                                                                           ll
                                                                                                                                     OPEN ACCESS
Article
                                                           1
                  mjo ðX Þ = KðX ; Xo Þ KðXo ; Xo Þ+s2n I yo                     (Equation 11)

                                                             1
      Sjo ðX Þ = KðX ; X Þ  KðX ; Xo Þ KðXo ; Xo Þ+s2n I KðXo ; X Þ;         (Equation 12)

where X = ½x;1 /x;n  denotes the n test locations, Xo = ½xo;1 /xo;no  denotes the
training locations with responses yoT = ½yo;1 /yo;no , and K(X1,X2) denotes the covari-
ance matrix that is constructed by applying the kernel function to all pairs of column
vectors from X1 and X2 (for a full derivation, see Williams and Rasmussen52).

The training of a GP refers to the choice of kernel function and the optimization of
associated hyperparameters, usually based on optimizing the marginal likelihood
of the training data. Subsequently, the posterior distribution can be calculated for
points of interest by inference using Equations 11 and 12.

SE kernel
The squared exponential (SE) kernel is a smooth, infinitely many times differentiable
kernel that only depends on the distance of data points and is given for 1D x by
                                                          !
                                                        2
                                            jx  x 0 j
                  kSE ðx; x 0 Þ = s2SE exp                  :          (Equation 13)
                                               2l2

We use three input dimensions—current, SOC, and temperature—and combine
three 1D RBF kernels to
                                                 !                            !
                      Y3
                                     xd  xd0
                                               2
                                                               X  xd  xd0 2
                                                                3
                 0
   kSE;3ARD ðx; x Þ =     sSE;d exp
                           2
                                                   = sSE;3 exp
                                                      2
                                                                               ;
                      d=1
                                        2ld2                   d=1
                                                                     2ld2
                                                                                   (Equation 14)
which is known as the SE-ARD kernel (ARD denotes ‘‘automatic relevance
detection’’ because each length scale represents the importance of its associated di-
rection; for more information, see Duvenaud54). There are four hyperparameters
associated with the 3D SE-ARD kernel: the output scale s2SE;3 , the length scale asso-
ciated with the current dimension l1 = lI, the length scale associated with the SOC
dimension l2 = lSOC, and the length scale associated with the temperature dimension
l3 = lT.

WV kernel
The WV model corresponds to the integrated Wiener process.67 The WV covariance
function or kernel is defined by

                                   min3 ft; t 0 g              min2 ft; t 0 g
           kWV ðt; t 0 Þ = s2WV                   + jt  t 0 j                :    (Equation 15)
                                       3                           2
The WV kernel has one hyperparameter: the WV output scale, s2WV .

The resulting kernel is

                  kðx; t; x 0 ; t 0 Þ = kSE;3ARD ðx; x 0 Þ + kWV ðt; t 0 Þ:        (Equation 16)
Including the noise variance s2n , there are six hyperparameters that define the char-
acteristics of the GP used in this article.


Spatiotemporal GPs
A large number of data points are recorded during the operation of a battery.
Ideally, all samples that fulfill the data selection criteria are used, but a classical exact
GP prevents this due to the unfavorable scaling of compute and memory usage. To



                                                                                      Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024      15
 Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
 tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




           ll
     OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                           Article

address this issue, we follow Huber47 and Solin67 and leverage the fact that we can
interpret the GP as a spatiotemporal GP. For lead-acid batteries, a spatiotemporal
GP approach has been shown by Aitio et al.28

A temporal GP, i.e., a GP that depends on only one variable, can be written as a Kal-
man filter,46,67 which makes it scale linearly with the number of data points, with the
restriction that the data points must be given in a sorted manner. Here, the variable is
actually time; therefore, this does not impose further restrictions.

A spatiotemporal GP67 is a GP that depends on multiple variables, one of which can
be regarded as the time variable and the others being the spatial variables,

                                                    t
                                            x =        :
                                                    xs

This concept leads to an infinite-dimensional Kalman filter that propagates the
mean and variance functions over the time points. When using only a finite num-
ber of spatial vectors, this eventually leads to a classical, finite-dimensional Kal-
man filter.67

We cannot restrict the actual measured data locations to a finite set. Therefore, we
combine the spatiotemporal approach with the recursive approach from Huber.47 In
this approach, the spatial part of the GP is not represented exactly but is represented
by nb predefined basis vectors xs,b,i that are collected into
                                                          
                           Xb = xs;b;1 xs;b;2 / xs;b;nb :

Combining these two approaches leads to the following procedure, which is similar
but not identical to the method used by Aitio et al.28 The difference is mentioned
below.

The state z of the Kalman filter,

                                                    zt
                                            z =        ;
                                                    zs

comprises two parts. zt corresponds to the representation of the temporal kernel. In
the case of the WV kernel, it contains two scalar values: the first represents the mean
value, and the second is the time derivative of the mean value.67 zs corresponds to
the spatial kernel, and for the Huber approach,47 these are the mean values at the
specified basis vectors Xb.

Evaluation
Given the state zkjk and its covariance matrix Pkjk at the time tk and built with all in-
formation available until tk, the mean and covariance at this time point can be calcu-
lated by
                                             
                                   mjk Xq ; tk = Hzkjk                   (Equation 17)

                           
                 Sjk Xq ; tk = Kqq + HPkjk HT  Hs Kbb HTs :                       (Equation 18)

The mean and the covariance of the GP at nq spatial vectors xs;q;i are collected into Xq
similar to Xb. Furthermore, we use the abbreviations

                        Kbb                                              
                               ˛ Rnb 3 nb ; ðKbb Þi;j = ks xs;b;i ; xs;b;j and
                        Kqq                                              
                                 ˛ Rnq 3 nq ; Kqq i;j = ks xs;q;i ; xs;q;j




16   Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024
 Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
 tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




                                                                                                                                                ll
                                                                                                                                           OPEN ACCESS
Article

for the covariance at the basis vectors and the covariance at the queried locations,
respectively.

The measurement matrix

                                         H = ½ Ht         Hs                           (Equation 19)
is partitioned according to z. The temporal part
                                         2     3
                                           1 0
                                    Ht = 4 « « 5                                        (Equation 20)
                                           1 0

reflects that for the WV kernel with the chosen representation, the first associated
state corresponds to the mean. The spatial part is
                                                   1
                                         Hs = Kqb Kbb ;                                 (Equation 21)

with
                                                                      
                           Kqb ˛ Rnq 3 nb ; Kqb i;j = ks xs;q;i ; xs;b;j

given by Huber.47 Here, our approach differs from the approach described by Aitio
et al.28 In Equation 21, only the inverse of Kbb is needed, which is known a priori and
can be calculated offline. The corresponding term used by Aitio et al.28 includes an
additional part that depends on the current state; thus, the inverse must be calcu-
lated in each step anew.

Prediction step
The prediction step of the Kalman filter is performed identically to Aitio et al.,28

                                    zkjk  1 = AðTs Þzk 1jk  1

                          Pkjk  1 = AðTs ÞPk 1jk  1 AT ðTs Þ + QðTs Þ;

with

                Pt ð0Þ     0                   At ðTs Þ     0                      Qt ðTs Þ     0
       Pð0Þ =                   ; AðTs Þ =                    ; and QðTs Þ =                      ;
                  0      Ps ð0Þ                   0         I                         0         0

where Ts = tk  tk  1 is the length of the time step that may be different for each
prediction step. The structure of these matrices shows the decoupling of the two
parts, i.e., the spatial state is not influenced by the time step. However, due to the
correction step, the covariance matrix will not retain its initial block diagonal
structure.

For the WV kernel (Equation 15), which is used as temporal kernel, the correspond-
ing matrices are
                                                             ""          ##
              0 0                1 Ts                          Ts3 3 Ts2 2
    Pt ð0Þ =        ; At ðTs Þ =       and Qt ðTs Þ = s2WV =                 :
              0 0                0 1                           T2 2     Ts     s

The initial value for the spatial covariance matrix is Ps ð0Þ = Kbb .          28,67



Correction step
When new measurements (Xm,k, ym,k) arrive, the Kalman filter performs a correc-
tion step
                                                          
                   zkjk = zkjk  1 + Kk ym;k  Hk zkjk  1
                   Pkjk = Pkjk  1  Kk Hk Pkjk  1 :



                                                                                              Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024   17
 Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
 tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




           ll
     OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                           Article

Xm,k is a matrix that contains the locations of the nm,k measurements, ym,k is a vec-
tor giving the measured output for each location in Xm,k, and Hk is the measure-
ment matrix build as in Equation 19 with Xq = Xm,k. The Kalman gain Kk is calcu-
lated by
                                                         1
                      Kk = Pkjk  1 HTk Sjk ðXm;k Þ+s2n I ;                        (Equation 22)

where Sjk ðXm;k Þ is given by Equation 18 with Xq = Xm,k. This step differs from Aitio
et al.28 by the different evaluation mentioned above and another measurement
model.

Remark 1
If nm,k = 0, i.e., no measurement data were acquired within the last time step, the
correction step can be skipped, and the algorithm proceeds with the next prediction
step. Alternatively, the algorithm could wait until new data are available and then
perform a larger prediction step.

Remark 2
In a standard Kalman filter setup, the correction step can be performed iteratively
for each group of measurements that is not correlated with measurements outside
this group. Consequently, for the case here, where we model the measurement
noise with the covariance matrix s2n I, i.e., all measurements are uncorrelated, each
measurement could be processed individually, thus rendering the matrix inverse
in Equation 22 a scalar inversion. However, due to some simplifications in the
approach of Huber47 that led to the filter equations, processing each measurement
individually or multiple measurements together in a minibatch is not analytically
equivalent for this application. Based on case studies, it seems to be advantageous
to add measurements in larger groups.

RTS smoother
The Rauch-Tung-Striebel (RTS) smoother allows for the calculation of the state
and covariance and, thus, the estimates mjn ðXq ; tk Þ and Sjn ðXq ; tk Þ at all time points
tk under consideration of the complete measured data of the n time points. This
smoother starts with the variables znjn and Pnjn of the last Kalman filter correction
step and iterates backward68 using
                                                           
                           zkjn = zkjk + Gk zk+1jn  zk+1jk                   (Equation 23)

                                                    
                     Pkjn = Pkjk + Gk Pk+1jn  Pk+1jk GTk                          (Equation 24)

for k = n  1; n  2; . with
                                                         1
                                 Gk = Pkjk Aðtk+1  tk ÞPk+1jk :                   (Equation 25)

The output values mjn ðXq ; tk Þ and their variances Sjn ðXq ; tk Þ for each time point tk can
be calculated by Equations 17 and 18 by replacing zkjk with zkjn and Pkjk with Pkjn .

To evaluate Equations 23, 24, and 25, the values zkjk and Pkjk calculated by the for-
ward pass of the Kalman filter are needed. Thus, these values must be stored while
performing the forward filtering pass. zk+1jk and Pk+1jk could be either stored also or
calculated anew from zkjk and Pkjk by reevaluating the prediction step.

Implementation
The batteries are mostly sampled with 5 s, which, with the very small magnitude of
sensible parameters for the output scale of the WV kernel, leads to numerical issues
in performing the prediction steps.


18    Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024
 Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
 tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




                                                                                                                                           ll
                                                                                                                                     OPEN ACCESS
Article

Therefore, we define a sampling time for the updates (1 h) and process all
data captured within this interval at the same update time point. If no data
were recorded within this hour, then we only performed a new prediction step
without the update to set an evaluation point for the later backward smooth-
ing pass.

Selection of basis vectors
The selection of basis vectors can be done in different ways. Similar to Aitio et al.,28
we found that using k-means to select the basis vectors is effective, i.e., the
results and confidence intervals of the spatiotemporal GP with 36 basis vectors
selected by k-means as well as the reference operating point, resulting in 37
basis vectors, resemble fairly closely the results of the full GP with up to 40,000
data points (compare Figures S4 and 5). To calculate the fault probabilities, we
use 60 basis vectors selected with k-means. However, in an online setting, there
will be no data available at the beginning. Therefore, as an alternative, we propose
placing vectors linearly within the range of the data selection criteria and setting a
constraint based on the length scale of the associated measurement (see Note S3
for more details).

Hyperparameter tuning
All battery systems contain the same prismatic cell type with the same specifications.
Therefore, the aim is to find a single hyperparameter set that can be used for all
cells. We optimized the marginal likelihood for all cells of systems 6 and 8 individu-
ally using an exact GP and 20,000 data points for each cell. Systems 6 and 8 have the
highest equivalent full cycle counts and were operated over a large temperature
range. Subsequently, we chose the median of each hyperparameter, assuming
that the parameters are mutually independent. We do not formulate an optimization
problem for the spatiotemporal GP but use the hyperparameters found by the
exact GP.

Software and hardware details
The full GP is solved on an NVIDIA A100 GPU with 80 GB RAM. We use the Python
GPytorch framework, allowing us to solve an exact GP with 40,000 data points in 11 s
on average. The recursive GP is solved on a MacBook Pro with a 10-core M1 chip,
taking approximately 22 s for the forward Kalman filter and 6 s for the RTS smoother
for a single cell of system 8 with 35,000 time steps, 320,000 data points, and 61 basis
points.

RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead contact
Requests for further information and resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead
contact, Rolf Findeisen (rolf.findeisen@iat.tu-darmstadt.de).


Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.


Data and code availability
    The latest version of the associated Python software BattGP is available on GitHub (https://
     github.com/JoachimSchaeffer/BattGP).
    The dataset is available on Zenodo (https://zenodo.org/records/13715694).


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank numerous people from the data provider for their outstanding support
throughout this project; however, we cannot name them due to the condition of anonymity from
the data provider. In particular, we are truly grateful for the outstanding support from our initial



                                                                                        Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024    19
  Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
  tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




            ll
      OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                                         Article

contact person at the data provider; without you, this work would not have been possible. The work
was financed through base funding from the Technical University of Darmstadt.


AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, J.S.; methodology, J.S., E.L., and D.G.; software, J.S., E.L., and D.G.; validation,
J.S.; formal analysis, J.S. and E.L.; investigation, J.S. and D.G.; data curation, J.S. and D.G.; writing –
original draft, J.S.; writing – review & editing, J.S., E.L., D.G., M.Z.B., R.D.B., and R.F.; visualization,
J.S. and E.L.; supervision, R.D.B. and R.F.; resources, R.F.; funding acquisition, R.F.


DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.


SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258.


Received: May 28, 2024
Revised: August 21, 2024
Accepted: September 28, 2024
Published: October 25, 2024


REFERENCES
 1. Blomgren, G.E. (2016). The development and            9. Li, W., Rentemeister, M., Badeda, J., Jöst, D.,      16. Samadani, E., Farhad, S., Scott, W., Mastali, M.,
    future of lithium ion batteries. J. Electrochem.         Schulte, D., and Sauer, D.U. (2020). Digital twin         Gimenez, L.E., Fowler, M., and Fraser, R.A.
    Soc. 164, A5019–A5025. https://doi.org/10.               for battery systems: Cloud battery                        (2015). Empirical modeling of lithium-ion
    1149/2.0251701jes.                                       management system with online state-of-                   batteries based on electrochemical impedance
                                                             charge and state-of-health estimation.                    spectroscopy tests. Electrochim. Acta 160,
 2. European Union (2023). Regulation (eu) 2023/             J. Energy Storage 30, 101557. https://doi.org/            169–177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.
    1542 of the european parliament and of the               10.1016/j.est.2020.101557.                                2015.02.021.
    council of 12 july 2023 concerning concerning
    batteries and waste batteries, amending              10. Pozzato, G., Allam, A., Pulvirenti, L., Negoita,      17. Severson, K.A., Attia, P.M., Jin, N., Perkins, N.,
    directive 2008/98/ec and regulation (eu) 2019/           G.A., Paxton, W.A., and Onori, S. (2023).                 Jiang, B., Yang, Z., Chen, M.H., Aykol, M.,
    1020 and repealing directive 2006/66/ec. O.J. L          Analysis and key findings from real-world                 Herring, P.K., Fraggedakis, D., et al. (2019).
    191/1 66, 1–117. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/          electric vehicle field data. Joule 7, 2035–2053.          Data-driven prediction of battery cycle life
    reg/2023/1542/oj.                                        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2023.07.018.              before capacity degradation. Nat. Energy 4,
                                                                                                                       383–391. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-019-
 3. Hanicke, M., Ibrahim, D., Jautelat, S., Torscht,     11. Ward, L., Babinec, S., Dufek, E.J., Howey, D.A.,          0356-8.
    L., van de Rijt, A., Linder, M., and Schaufuss, P.       Viswanathan, V., Aykol, M., Beck, D.A., Blaiszik,
    (2023). Battery demand is growing–and so is              B., Chen, B.-R., Crabtree, G., et al. (2022).         18. Jones, P.K., Stimming, U., and Lee, A.A. (2022).
    the need for better solutions along the value            Principles of the battery data genome. Joule 6,           Impedance-based forecasting of lithium-ion
    chain. https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/              2253–2271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.               battery performance amid uneven usage. Nat.
    automotive-and-assembly/our-insights/                    2022.08.008.                                              Commun. 13, 4806. https://doi.org/10.1038/
    battery-2030-resilient-sustainable-and-circular.                                                                   s41467-022-32422-w.
                                                         12. Schaeffer, J., Galuppini, G., Rhyu, J., Asinger,
 4. Sun, P., Bisschop, R., Niu, H., and Huang, X.            P.A., Droop, R., Findeisen, R., and Braatz, R.D.      19. Schaeffer, J., Gasper, P., Garcia-Tamayo, E.,
    (2020). A review of battery fires in electric            (2024). Cycle life prediction for lithium-ion             Gasper, R., Adachi, M., Pablo Gaviria-Cardona,
    vehicles. Fire Technol. 56, 1361–1410. https://          batteries: Machine learning and more. arXiv.              J., Montoya-Bedoya, S., Bhutani, A., Schiek, A.,
    doi.org/10.1007/s10694-020-00958-2.                      https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.04049                          Goodall, R., et al. (2023). Machine learning
                                                                                                                       benchmarks for the classification of equivalent
 5. Im, D.-H., and Chung, J.-B. (2023). Social           13. Krewer, U., Röder, F., Harinath, E., Braatz, R.D.,       circuit models from solid-state electrochemical
    construction of fire accidents in battery energy         Bedürftig, B., and Findeisen, R. (2018). Dynamic         impedance spectra. J. Electrochem. Soc. 170,
    storage systems in korea. J. Energy Storage 71,          models of li-ion batteries for diagnosis and              060512. https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/
    108192. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2023.              operation: A review and perspective.                      acd8fb.
    108192.                                                  J. Electrochem. Soc. 165, A3656–A3673.
                                                             https://doi.org/10.1149/2.1061814jes.                 20. Schaeffer, J., Lenz, E., Chueh, W.C., Bazant,
 6. Hu, W. (2023). How New York plans to regulate                                                                      M.Z., Findeisen, R., and Braatz, R.D. (2024).
    e-bikes in the wake of deadly fires. The New         14. Ramadesigan, V., Northrop, P.W.C., De, S.,                Interpretation of high-dimensional linear
    York Times. September 15, 2023. https://www.             Santhanagopalan, S., Braatz, R.D., and                    regression: Effects of nullspace and
    nytimes.com/article/ebike-laws-nyc.html.                 Subramanian, V.R. (2012). Modeling and                    regularization demonstrated on battery data.
                                                             simulation of lithium-ion batteries from a                Comput. Chem. Eng. 180, 108471. https://doi.
 7. Sulzer, V., Mohtat, P., Aitio, A., Lee, S., Yeh,         systems engineering perspective.                          org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2023.108471.
    Y.T., Steinbacher, F., Khan, M.U., Lee, J.W.,            J. Electrochem. Soc. 159, R31–R45. https://doi.
    Siegel, J.B., Stefanopoulou, A.G., and Howey,            org/10.1149/2.018203jes.                              21. Richardson, R.R., Osborne, M.A., and Howey,
    D.A. (2021). The challenge and opportunity of                                                                      D.A. (2017). Gaussian process regression for
    battery lifetime prediction from field data.         15. Petit, M., Prada, E., and Sauvant-Moynot, V.              forecasting battery state of health. J. Power
    Joule 5, 1934–1955. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.           (2016). Development of an empirical aging                 Sources 357, 209–219. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    joule.2021.06.005.                                       model for li-ion batteries and application to             j.jpowsour.2017.05.004.
                                                             assess the impact of vehicle-to-grid strategies
 8. Plett, G.L. (2015). Battery Management                   on battery lifetime. Appl. Energy 172, 398–407.       22. Richardson, R.R., Birkl, C.R., Osborne, M.A.,
    Systems: Equivalent-Circuit Methods, 2 (Artech           https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.                  and Howey, D.A. (2019). Gaussian process
    House).                                                  03.119.                                                   regression for in situ capacity estimation of




20     Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024
  Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
  tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




                                                                                                                                                            ll
                                                                                                                                                      OPEN ACCESS
Article

    lithium-ion batteries. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 15,      35. Li, X., Dai, K., Wang, Z., and Han, W. (2020).         47. Huber, M.F. (2014). Recursive
    127–138. https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2018.                Lithium-ion batteries fault diagnostic for                 Gaussian process: On-line regression
    2794997.                                                  electric vehicles using sample entropy analysis            and learning. Pattern Recogn. Lett. 45, 85–91.
                                                              method. J. Energy Storage 27, 101121. https://             https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2014.03.004.
23. Newman, J., and Tiedemann, W. (1975).                     doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2019.101121.
    Porous-electrode theory with battery                                                                             48. Aitio, A., Jöst, D., Sauer, D.U., and Howey,
    applications. AIChE J. 21, 25–41. https://doi.        36. Chen, Z., Xiong, R., Tian, J., Shang, X., and Lu,          D.A. (2023). Learning battery model
    org/10.1002/aic.690210103.                                J. (2016). Model-based fault diagnosis                     parameter dynamics from data with recursive
                                                              approach on external short circuit of lithium-             gaussian process regression. arXiv. https://
24. Doyle, M., Fuller, T.F., and Newman, J. (1993).           ion battery used in electric vehicles. Appl.               doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.13666.arXiv.
    Modeling of galvanostatic charge and                      Energy 184, 365—–374. https://doi.org/10.                  preprint.
    discharge of the lithium/polymer/insertion cell.          1016/j.apenergy.2016.10.026.
    J. Electrochem. Soc. 140, 1526–1533. https://                                                                    49. Figgener, J., van Ouwerkerk, J., Haberschusz,
    doi.org/10.1149/1.2221597.                            37. Zhang, K., Hu, X., Liu, Y., Lin, X., and Liu, W.           D., Bors, J., Woerner, P., Mennekes, M.,
                                                              (2022). Multi-fault detection and isolation for            Hildenbrand, F., Hecht, C., Kairies, K.P.,
25. Jokar, A., Rajabloo, B., Désilets, M., and               lithium-ion battery systems. IEEE Trans. Power             Wessels, O., and Sauer, D.U. (2024). Multi-year
    Lacroix, M. (2016). Review of simplified                  Electron. 37, 971–989. https://doi.org/10.1109/            field measurements of home storage systems
    Pseudo-two-Dimensional models of lithium-                 TPEL.2021.3098445.                                         and their use in capacity estimation. Nat.
    ion batteries. J. Power Sources 327, 44–55.                                                                          Energy, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2016.              38. Sadhukhan, C., Mitra, S.K., Bhattacharyya, S.,             024-01620-9.
    07.036.                                                   Almatrafi, E., Saleh, B., and Naskar, M.K. (2022).
                                                              Modeling and simulation of high energy                 50. Beck, D., Dechent, P., Junker, M., Sauer, D.U.,
26. Aykol, M., Gopal, C.B., Anapolsky, A.,                                                                               and Dubarry, M. (2021). Inhomogeneities and
                                                              density lithium-ion battery for multiple fault
    Herring, P.K., van Vlijmen, B., Berliner, M.D.,
                                                              detection. Sci. Rep. 12, 9800. https://doi.org/            cell-to-cell variations in lithium-ion batteries, a
    Bazant, M.Z., Braatz, R.D., Chueh, W.C., and                                                                         review. Energies 14, 3276. https://doi.org/10.
                                                              10.1038/s41598-022-13771-4.
    Storey, B.D. (2021). Perspective—Combining                                                                           3390/en14113276.
    physics and machine learning to predict               39. Zhao, Y., Liu, P., Wang, Z., Zhang, L., and
    battery lifetime. J. Electrochem. Soc. 168,               Hong, J. (2017). Fault and defect diagnosis            51. Barbers, E., Hust, F.E., Hildenbrand, F.E.A.,
    030525. https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/                of battery for electric vehicles based on big              Frie, F., Quade, K.L., Bihn, S., Sauer, D.U., and
    abec55.                                                   data analysis methods. Appl. Energy 207,                   Dechent, P. (2024). Exploring the effects of cell-
                                                              354–362. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.               to-cell variability on battery aging through
27. Nascimento, R.G., Corbetta, M., Kulkarni, C.S.,                                                                      stochastic simulation techniques. J. Energy
                                                              2017.05.139.
    and Viana, F.A. (2021). Hybrid physics-informed                                                                      Storage 84, 110851. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    neural networks for lithium-ion battery               40. Samanta, A., Chowdhuri, S., and Williamson,                est.2024.110851.
    modeling and prognosis. J. Power Sources 513,             S.S. (2021). Machine learning-based data-
    230526. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.               driven fault detection/diagnosis of lithium-           52. Williams, C.K.I., and Rasmussen, C.E. (2006).
    2021.230526.                                              ion battery: A critical review. Electronics 10,            Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning, 2
                                                              1309. https://doi.org/10.3390/                             (MIT Press).
28. Aitio, A., and Howey, D.A. (2021). Predicting
    battery end of life from solar off-grid system            electronics10111309.
                                                                                                                     53. Anseán, D., Garcı́a, V.M., González, M., Viera,
    field data using machine learning. Joule 5,           41. Schmid, M., Kneidinger, H.-G., and Endisch, C.             J.C., Blanco, C., and Antuña, J.L. (2013). DC
    3204–3220. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.               (2021). Data-driven fault diagnosis in battery             internal resistance during charge: Analysis and
    2021.11.006.                                              systems through cross-cell monitoring. IEEE                study on LiFePO 4batteries. World Electric
                                                              Sens. J. 21, 1829–1837. https://doi.org/10.                Vehicle Symposium and Exhibition (EVS27),
29. Hu, X., Zhang, K., Liu, K., Lin, X., Dey, S., and                                                                    1–11. https://doi.org/10.1109/EVS.2013.
    Onori, S. (2020). Advanced fault diagnosis for            1109/JSEN.2020.3017812.
                                                                                                                         6914746.
    lithium-ion battery systems: A review of fault
                                                          42. Zhao, J., Ling, H., Wang, J., Burke, A.F., and
    mechanisms, fault features, and diagnosis                                                                        54. Duvenaud, D. (2014). Automatic Model
                                                              Lian, Y. (2022). Data-driven prediction of
    procedures. EEE. Ind. Electron. Mag. 14,                                                                             Construction with Gaussian Processes (Ph.D.
                                                              battery failure for electric vehicles. iScience 25,
    65–91. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIE.2020.                                                                             thesis University of Cambridge UK).
                                                              104172. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2022.
    2964814.
                                                              104172.                                                55. Cogswell, D.A., and Bazant, M.Z. (2013). Theory
30. Wang, Q., Mao, B., Stoliarov, S.I., and Sun, J.                                                                      of coherent nucleation in phase-separating
                                                          43. Xiong, R., Li, L., and Tian, J. (2018). Towards
    (2019). A review of lithium ion battery failure
                                                              a smarter battery management system: A                     nanoparticles. Nano Lett. 13, 3036–3041.
    mechanisms and fire prevention strategies.                                                                           https://doi.org/10.1021/nl400497t.
                                                              critical review on battery state of health
    Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 73, 95–131. https://
                                                              monitoring methods. J. Power Sources 405,              56. Ferguson, T.R., and Bazant, M.Z. (2014). Phase
    doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2019.03.002.
                                                              18–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.                 transformation dynamics in porous battery
31. Tran, M.-K., and Fowler, M. (2020). A review of           2018.10.019.                                               electrodes. Electrochim. Acta 146, 89–97.
    lithium-ion battery fault diagnostic algorithms:                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2014.08.083.
    Current progress and future challenges.               44. Berecibar, M., Gandiaga, I., Villarreal, I., Omar,
    Algorithms 13, 62. https://doi.org/10.3390/               N., Van Mierlo, J., and Van den Bossche, P.            57. Islam, S.M.R., Park, S.-Y., and Balasingam, B.
    a13030062.                                                (2016). Critical review of state of health                 (2020). Unification of internal resistance
                                                              estimation methods of li-ion batteries for real            estimation methods for li-ion batteries using
32. Jiang, L., Deng, Z., Tang, X., Hu, L., Lin, X., and       applications. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 56,              hysteresis-free equivalent circuit models.
    Hu, X. (2021). Data-driven fault diagnosis and            572–587. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.              Batteries 6, 32. https://doi.org/10.3390/
    thermal runaway warning for battery packs                 11.042.                                                    batteries6020032.
    using real-world vehicle data. Energy 234,
    121266. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.        45. Attia, P.M., Bills, A., Brosa Planella, F., Dechent,   58. Ludwig, S., Zilberman, I., Horsche, M.F.,
    121266.                                                   P., dos Reis, G., Dubarry, M., Gasper, P.,                 Wohlers, T., and Jossen, A. (2021). Pulse
                                                              Gilchrist, R., Greenbank, S., Howey, D., et al.            resistance based online temperature
33. Kang, Y., Duan, B., Zhou, Z., Shang, Y., and              (2022). Review—‘‘knees’’ in lithium-ion battery            estimation for lithium-ion cells. J. Power
    Zhang, C. (2020). Online multi-fault detection            aging trajectories. J. Electrochem. Soc. 169,              Sources 490, 229523. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    and diagnosis for battery packs in electric               060517. https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/                 jpowsour.2021.229523.
    vehicles. Appl. Energy 259, 114170. https://doi.          ac6d13.
    org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.114170.                                                                              59. Bai, P., and Bazant, M.Z. (2014). Charge transfer
                                                          46. Särkkä, S., Solin, A., and Hartikainen, J. (2013).       kinetics at the solid–solid interface in porous
34. Li, X., and Wang, Z. (2018). A novel fault                Spatiotemporal learning via infinite-dimensional           electrodes. Nat. Commun. 5, 3585. https://doi.
    diagnosis method for lithium-ion battery packs            Bayesian filtering and smoothing: A look at                org/10.1038/ncomms4585.
    of electric vehicles. Measurement 116,                    Gaussian process regression through Kalman
    402–411. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.                       filtering. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 30, 51–61.        60. Bazant, M.Z. (2023). Unified quantum
    measurement.2017.11.034.                                  https://doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2013.2246292.                  theory of electrochemical kinetics by



                                                                                                 Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024              21
  Please cite this article in press as: Schaeffer et al., Gaussian process-based online health monitoring and fault analysis of lithium-ion battery sys-
  tems from field data, Cell Reports Physical Science (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102258




             ll
       OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                                                                                      Article

     coupled ion–electron transfer. Faraday              64. Le, J.-L., Bazant, Z.P., and Bazant, M.Z. (2009).      ion batteries with temperature difference.
     Discuss 246, 60–124. https://doi.org/10.                Lifetime of high-k gate dielectrics and analogy         J. Power Sources 263, 75–84. https://doi.org/
     1039/D3FD00108C.                                        with strength of quasibrittle structures. J. Appl.      10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.04.034.
                                                             Phys. 106, 104119. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.
61. Jr, J.L.H., and Lehmann, E.L. (1963). Estimates          3256225.                                             67. Solin, A. (2016). Stochastic
    of location based on rank tests. Ann. Math.                                                                       Differential Equation Methods for
    Stat. 34, 598–611. https://doi.org/10.1214/          65. Gogoana, R., Pinson, M.B., Bazant, M.Z., and             Spatio-Temporal Gaussian
    aoms/1177704172.                                         Sarma, S.E. (2014). Internal resistance                  Process Regression (Ph.D.
                                                             matching for parallel-connected                          thesis Aalto University). https://aaltodoc.
62. Gumbel, E.J. (1958). Statistics of Extremes
                                                             lithium-ion cells and impacts on battery pack            aalto.fi/handle/123456789/
    (Columbia University Press).
                                                             cycle life. J. Power Sources 252, 8–13. https://         19842AaltoUniversitypublicationseries
63. Fisher, R.A., and Tippett, L.H.C. (1928). Limiting       doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.11.101.                  DoctoralDissertations, 50/2016.
    forms of the frequency distribution of the
    largest or smallest member of a sample. Math.        66. Chiu, K.-C., Lin, C.-H., Yeh, S.-F., Lin, Y.-H.,     68. Särkkä, S., and Solin, A. (2019). Applied
    Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 24, 180–190. https://doi.         Huang, C.-S., and Chen, K.-C. (2014).                    Stochastic Differential Equations (Cambridge
    org/10.1017/S0305004100015681.                           Cycle life analysis of series connected lithium-         University Press).




22     Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102258, November 20, 2024
