                batteries
Article
Incremental Capacity Analysis as a State of Health
Estimation Method for Lithium-Ion Battery Modules
with Series-Connected Cells
Amelie Krupp 1, * , Ernst Ferg 2 , Frank Schuldt 1 , Karen Derendorf 1 and Carsten Agert 1

                                                1   DLR Institute of Networked Energy Systems, Carl-von-Ossietzky-Str. 15, 26129 Oldenburg, Germany;
                                                    Frank.Schuldt@dlr.de (F.S.); Karen.Derendorf@dlr.de (K.D.); Carsten.Agert@dlr.de (C.A.)
                                                2   Department of Chemistry and uYilo, e-Mobility Technology Innovation Programme, Nelson Mandela
                                                    University, P.O. Box 77000, Port Elizabeth 6001, South Africa; Ernst.Ferg@mandela.ac.za
                                                *   Correspondence: Amelie.Krupp@dlr.de; Tel.: +49-441-99906-282


                                                Abstract: Incremental capacity analysis (ICA) has proven to be an effective tool for determining
                                                the state of health (SOH) of Li-ion cells under laboratory conditions. This paper deals with an
                                                outstanding challenge of applying ICA in practice: the evaluation of battery series connections. The
                                                study uses experimental aging and characterization data of lithium iron phosphate (LFP) cells down
                                                to 53% SOH. The evaluability of battery series connections using ICA is confirmed by analytical
                                                and experimental considerations for cells of the same SOH. For cells of different SOH, a method for
                                                identifying non-uniform aging states on the modules’ IC curve is presented. The findings enable the
                                                classification of battery modules with series and parallel connections based on partial terminal data.

                                                Keywords: lithium-ion batteries; state-of-health; incremental capacity analysis; battery module


       
       
                                                1. Introduction
Citation: Krupp, A.; Ferg, E.; Schuldt,
                                                      In view of global initiatives to control the effects of greenhouse gas emissions, there
F.; Derendorf, K.; Agert, C.
                                                have been considerable efforts to reduce the use of fossil fuels as an energy source and to
Incremental Capacity Analysis as a
State of Health Estimation Method for
                                                lower carbon dioxide emissions. One of the main initiatives to do this involves switching
Lithium-Ion Battery Modules with
                                                to a more sustainable energy supply using renewable energy systems. This has become a
Series-Connected Cells. Batteries 2021,         political, scientific, and social focus-point for many countries. With the increase in the use
7, 2. https://doi.org/10.3390/                  of renewable energy, there are significant demands for long-term and cost-effective means
batteries7010002                                of not only storing the energy but being able to supply it reliably into the national grid
                                                electricity system. Lithium-ion battery storage systems have become one of the important
Received: 22 October 2020                       emerging energy storage solutions, used within a diverse field of applications ranging from
Accepted: 15 December 2020                      electric vehicles to smart grid systems [1,2]. Since the storage system or battery is probably
Published: 30 December 2020                     the most expensive part of an application, it is important to optimize its lifetime usage
                                                as far as possible. Over the lifetime of a battery, its electrochemical properties degrade
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neu-               due to aging mechanisms such as electrolyte decomposition, lithium deposition, or loss
tral with regard to jurisdictional claims       of electrical contact in the electrode’s active material. These in turn lead to aging modes
in published maps and institutional             that are described in the literature as loss of lithium inventory (LLI), loss of active material
affiliations.                                   (LAM), and resistance increase (RI) [3,4]. In order to estimate the remaining operating time
                                                of a battery storage system and to ensure safety and efficiency, it is necessary to determine
                                                its state of health (SOH). The SOH refers to the remaining electrical capacity that a battery
Copyright: © 2020 by the authors. Li-
                                                can achieve at a certain rate and is calculated by the ratio of the actual battery or cell
censee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This           capacity to the nominal capacity. For most applications, the end of life (EOL) of a battery
article is an open access article distributed   is usually a pre-defined minimum that is specified as an achievable capacity that allows
under the terms and conditions of the           the battery to still meet and maintain the system’s working requirements before the lower
Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY)            voltage limit is reached. For example, in electric vehicle applications 80% SOH is defined
license (https://creativecommons.org/           as the EOL [5]. In second life applications, which are usually for stationary type systems,
licenses/by/4.0/).                              an EOL of 60% is sometimes set as the requirement. Lower EOLs are also conceivable,



Batteries 2021, 7, 2. https://doi.org/10.3390/batteries7010002                                                  https://www.mdpi.com/journal/batteries
Batteries 2021, 7, 2                                                                                           2 of 13




                       provided that battery failure does not result in a critical thermal event. These events can
                       be unpredictable and be reached relatively quickly, especially in a system in which there
                       are unbalanced cells at various SOHs [6]. It is therefore essential to reliably determine the
                       SOH of a battery module in real-time use and to access to some degree the variations in the
                       single cells’ SOH.
                             There are currently no uniform opinions in industry and the scientific community
                       as to how best to identify the SOH of batteries in real-time online applications [5]. An
                       experimental method for SOH determination is the incremental capacity analysis (ICA).
                       The incremental capacity (IC) is defined by the derivative of the capacity dQ with respect
                       to the voltage dV:
                                                                     dQ     ∆Q
                                                               IC =      ≈      .                                 (1)
                                                                     dV     ∆V
                             In practice, larger voltage and capacity intervals ∆V and ∆Q are often utilized to
                       calculate the IC from measured data. In general, a fixed voltage interval is used for this
                       purpose [7–11]. The evaluation of the IC transforms plateaus observed in the voltage curve
                       into characteristic, clearly identifiable peaks. These peaks represent phase equilibria in
                       both the anode and cathode and thus the chemical processes within the battery. The IC
                       peaks therefore provide information about the electrochemical processes within the cells,
                       which are closely linked to their aging behavior. For this reason, the occurrence of the
                       aging modes RI, LLI, and LAM can be determined, qualified, and quantified by analyzing
                       the incremental capacity curves obtained from a set of cells [3,12–14]. Furthermore, the
                       evaluation of the features of interest (FOI) of the IC peaks, which include peak height, area,
                       and position, allows conclusions to be made regarding the capacity and changes in the
                       internal resistance of a battery cell. ICA is suitable for non-destructive SOH determination
                       as it only needs the current, voltage, and temperature data of battery cells or modules.
                       The calculation of the IC curve and the evaluation of the battery SOH also require a low
                       computing effort, which is an advantage over model-based methods like equivalent circuit
                       models that are obtained using electrochemical impendence spectroscopy (EIS). More
                       information about alternative SOH estimation techniques can be found, for example, in an
                       article by Berecibar et al. [5].
                             Various articles in the literature deal with the implementation of ICA for online
                       applications. Weng et al. [15] used support vector regression (SVR) to generate the IC curves
                       of lithium iron phosphate (LFP) cells and determined the correlation of the peak height with
                       the SOH for eight equally aged cells. The SOHs of seven of these cells were determined
                       based on the reference data obtained from one cell with less than one percent absolute
                       error. Lin et al. [16] first smoothed the data by means of a proposed cubic smoothing spline
                       method, which was further compared to other filtering methods under different voltage
                       window sizes. Subsequently, they demonstrated a SOH estimation method evaluating the
                       IC peak height of LFP cells. In the given examples, the processing and smoothing of the
                       measurement data needed little computational effort, and the limitations of the regions
                       of interest on both the charge and discharge curves in online applications were taken into
                       consideration. Unfortunately, the application of ICA in larger-scale real applications faces
                       further challenges that include the influence of the variation of temperature, which has
                       already been shown multiple times [9,17–19] and the evaluation of battery modules. Within
                       modules, cells are always coupled in parallel and/or series in order to meet the energy and
                       power density requirements of the system. Their evaluation poses a challenge since the
                       battery’s SOH is only a collective average of all cells within the module and often relies on
                       the performance of the weakest cell or group of cells. In parallel connections, the unequal
                       distribution of currents between the non-uniform cells affects the formation of the module’s
                       IC peaks since the single cell current could vary over the charging process, even if the total
                       module current remains constant. In a series connection, the individual cell voltages are
                       superimposed onto the overall module’s voltage, which makes it difficult to obtain the
                       true IC curve characteristics of a weaker or stronger cell, respectively. Nevertheless, it is
                       reasonable to aim for the evaluation of the module and single-cell SOH via module data
