                batteries
Article
Incremental Capacity Analysis as a State of Health
Estimation Method for Lithium-Ion Battery Modules
with Series-Connected Cells
Amelie Krupp 1, * , Ernst Ferg 2 , Frank Schuldt 1 , Karen Derendorf 1 and Carsten Agert 1

                                                1   DLR Institute of Networked Energy Systems, Carl-von-Ossietzky-Str. 15, 26129 Oldenburg, Germany;
                                                    Frank.Schuldt@dlr.de (F.S.); Karen.Derendorf@dlr.de (K.D.); Carsten.Agert@dlr.de (C.A.)
                                                2   Department of Chemistry and uYilo, e-Mobility Technology Innovation Programme, Nelson Mandela
                                                    University, P.O. Box 77000, Port Elizabeth 6001, South Africa; Ernst.Ferg@mandela.ac.za
                                                *   Correspondence: Amelie.Krupp@dlr.de; Tel.: +49-441-99906-282


                                                Abstract: Incremental capacity analysis (ICA) has proven to be an effective tool for determining
                                                the state of health (SOH) of Li-ion cells under laboratory conditions. This paper deals with an
                                                outstanding challenge of applying ICA in practice: the evaluation of battery series connections. The
                                                study uses experimental aging and characterization data of lithium iron phosphate (LFP) cells down
                                                to 53% SOH. The evaluability of battery series connections using ICA is confirmed by analytical
                                                and experimental considerations for cells of the same SOH. For cells of different SOH, a method for
                                                identifying non-uniform aging states on the modules’ IC curve is presented. The findings enable the
                                                classification of battery modules with series and parallel connections based on partial terminal data.

                                                Keywords: lithium-ion batteries; state-of-health; incremental capacity analysis; battery module


       
       
                                                1. Introduction
Citation: Krupp, A.; Ferg, E.; Schuldt,
                                                      In view of global initiatives to control the effects of greenhouse gas emissions, there
F.; Derendorf, K.; Agert, C.
                                                have been considerable efforts to reduce the use of fossil fuels as an energy source and to
Incremental Capacity Analysis as a
State of Health Estimation Method for
                                                lower carbon dioxide emissions. One of the main initiatives to do this involves switching
Lithium-Ion Battery Modules with
                                                to a more sustainable energy supply using renewable energy systems. This has become a
Series-Connected Cells. Batteries 2021,         political, scientific, and social focus-point for many countries. With the increase in the use
7, 2. https://doi.org/10.3390/                  of renewable energy, there are significant demands for long-term and cost-effective means
batteries7010002                                of not only storing the energy but being able to supply it reliably into the national grid
                                                electricity system. Lithium-ion battery storage systems have become one of the important
Received: 22 October 2020                       emerging energy storage solutions, used within a diverse field of applications ranging from
Accepted: 15 December 2020                      electric vehicles to smart grid systems [1,2]. Since the storage system or battery is probably
Published: 30 December 2020                     the most expensive part of an application, it is important to optimize its lifetime usage
                                                as far as possible. Over the lifetime of a battery, its electrochemical properties degrade
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neu-               due to aging mechanisms such as electrolyte decomposition, lithium deposition, or loss
tral with regard to jurisdictional claims       of electrical contact in the electrode’s active material. These in turn lead to aging modes
in published maps and institutional             that are described in the literature as loss of lithium inventory (LLI), loss of active material
affiliations.                                   (LAM), and resistance increase (RI) [3,4]. In order to estimate the remaining operating time
                                                of a battery storage system and to ensure safety and efficiency, it is necessary to determine
                                                its state of health (SOH). The SOH refers to the remaining electrical capacity that a battery
Copyright: © 2020 by the authors. Li-
                                                can achieve at a certain rate and is calculated by the ratio of the actual battery or cell
censee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This           capacity to the nominal capacity. For most applications, the end of life (EOL) of a battery
article is an open access article distributed   is usually a pre-defined minimum that is specified as an achievable capacity that allows
under the terms and conditions of the           the battery to still meet and maintain the system’s working requirements before the lower
Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY)            voltage limit is reached. For example, in electric vehicle applications 80% SOH is defined
license (https://creativecommons.org/           as the EOL [5]. In second life applications, which are usually for stationary type systems,
licenses/by/4.0/).                              an EOL of 60% is sometimes set as the requirement. Lower EOLs are also conceivable,



Batteries 2021, 7, 2. https://doi.org/10.3390/batteries7010002                                                  https://www.mdpi.com/journal/batteries
Batteries 2021, 7, 2                                                                                           2 of 13




                       provided that battery failure does not result in a critical thermal event. These events can
                       be unpredictable and be reached relatively quickly, especially in a system in which there
                       are unbalanced cells at various SOHs [6]. It is therefore essential to reliably determine the
                       SOH of a battery module in real-time use and to access to some degree the variations in the
                       single cells’ SOH.
                             There are currently no uniform opinions in industry and the scientific community
                       as to how best to identify the SOH of batteries in real-time online applications [5]. An
                       experimental method for SOH determination is the incremental capacity analysis (ICA).
                       The incremental capacity (IC) is defined by the derivative of the capacity dQ with respect
                       to the voltage dV:
                                                                     dQ     ∆Q
                                                               IC =      ≈      .                                 (1)
                                                                     dV     ∆V
                             In practice, larger voltage and capacity intervals ∆V and ∆Q are often utilized to
                       calculate the IC from measured data. In general, a fixed voltage interval is used for this
                       purpose [7–11]. The evaluation of the IC transforms plateaus observed in the voltage curve
                       into characteristic, clearly identifiable peaks. These peaks represent phase equilibria in
                       both the anode and cathode and thus the chemical processes within the battery. The IC
                       peaks therefore provide information about the electrochemical processes within the cells,
                       which are closely linked to their aging behavior. For this reason, the occurrence of the
                       aging modes RI, LLI, and LAM can be determined, qualified, and quantified by analyzing
                       the incremental capacity curves obtained from a set of cells [3,12–14]. Furthermore, the
                       evaluation of the features of interest (FOI) of the IC peaks, which include peak height, area,
                       and position, allows conclusions to be made regarding the capacity and changes in the
                       internal resistance of a battery cell. ICA is suitable for non-destructive SOH determination
                       as it only needs the current, voltage, and temperature data of battery cells or modules.
                       The calculation of the IC curve and the evaluation of the battery SOH also require a low
                       computing effort, which is an advantage over model-based methods like equivalent circuit
                       models that are obtained using electrochemical impendence spectroscopy (EIS). More
                       information about alternative SOH estimation techniques can be found, for example, in an
                       article by Berecibar et al. [5].
                             Various articles in the literature deal with the implementation of ICA for online
                       applications. Weng et al. [15] used support vector regression (SVR) to generate the IC curves
                       of lithium iron phosphate (LFP) cells and determined the correlation of the peak height with
                       the SOH for eight equally aged cells. The SOHs of seven of these cells were determined
                       based on the reference data obtained from one cell with less than one percent absolute
                       error. Lin et al. [16] first smoothed the data by means of a proposed cubic smoothing spline
                       method, which was further compared to other filtering methods under different voltage
                       window sizes. Subsequently, they demonstrated a SOH estimation method evaluating the
                       IC peak height of LFP cells. In the given examples, the processing and smoothing of the
                       measurement data needed little computational effort, and the limitations of the regions
                       of interest on both the charge and discharge curves in online applications were taken into
                       consideration. Unfortunately, the application of ICA in larger-scale real applications faces
                       further challenges that include the influence of the variation of temperature, which has
                       already been shown multiple times [9,17–19] and the evaluation of battery modules. Within
                       modules, cells are always coupled in parallel and/or series in order to meet the energy and
                       power density requirements of the system. Their evaluation poses a challenge since the
                       battery’s SOH is only a collective average of all cells within the module and often relies on
                       the performance of the weakest cell or group of cells. In parallel connections, the unequal
                       distribution of currents between the non-uniform cells affects the formation of the module’s
                       IC peaks since the single cell current could vary over the charging process, even if the total
                       module current remains constant. In a series connection, the individual cell voltages are
                       superimposed onto the overall module’s voltage, which makes it difficult to obtain the
                       true IC curve characteristics of a weaker or stronger cell, respectively. Nevertheless, it is
                       reasonable to aim for the evaluation of the module and single-cell SOH via module data
Batteries 2021, 7, 2                                                                                                3 of 13




                       due to time savings, reduction of computational effort or lack of access to single-cell data.
                       Therefore, various studies have investigated the application of ICA for SOH determination
                       on battery modules. Weng et al. [10] showed by means of simulations and experimental
                       investigations that the evaluation of single-cell correlations was also possible in their
                       parallel configuration of LFP batteries. Jiang et al. [20] examined LFP modules consisting
                       of five cells connected in parallel from an aged electric vehicle battery. They found that
                       the height and area of the third IC peak show a linear correlation with the capacity, which
                       was then used for the SOH determination of the modules. Lee et al. [21] applied a single
                       cell linear regression model based on the correlation of the SOH with an appropriate IC
                       curve peak point to the serially connected battery stages of a 12S28P NCA battery. The
                       SOH of the individual series connections could be determined with less than 1% error.
                       The individual evaluation of serially connected batteries or battery packs using ICA is
                       therefore possible. However, the processing and evaluation of the IC curves of each serially
                       connected pack requires a high level of computing effort, especially for large battery packs.
                       Furthermore, it is not always possible to access this data, e.g., in third-party second life
                       modules. Kalogiannis et al. [22] reported on a battery with cells connected in series. They
                       observed that the scaled incremental capacity of a module consisting of series-connected
                       cells with identical capacity corresponded to the average of the IC of the individual cells.
                       However, the influence of different aging states of the cells on the overall module’s ICA
                       remains an open question.
                             In this work, the evaluation of a module with series-connected cells based on the
                       module data is examined in more detail. On the one hand, the aim is to determine the SOH
                       of a module including cells connected in series by only having to evaluate data within a
                       short specific state of charge (SOC) range, thereby reducing processed data and time. On
                       the other hand, qualitative and quantitative SOH analyses of single-cell SOH differences
                       using the module ICA are discussed. For this purpose, an extensive experimental study was
                       carried out on LFP single cells and their connection within a 12V module. Different single-
                       cell states of health were generated through cyclization with various current rates. The
                       applicability of ICA to modules consisting of cells connected in series was first analytically
                       and then experimentally investigated. Based on these results, a method to classify modules
                       on the basis of their partial terminal data is presented.

                       2. Experimental
                       2.1. Cell Specification and Testing System
                            The cells investigated were prismatic LiFePO4 cells made by the manufacturer Winston
                       with a nominal capacity of 40 Ah. In the module, they were assembled into a 12 V battery
                       consisting of four cells in series. The corresponding cell specifications are listed in Table 1.

                       Table 1. Main specifications of the Winston batteries according to the manufacturer data sheet.

                                          Parameter                                           Value
                                  Positive electrode material                                LiFePO4
                                  Negative electrode material                               Graphite
                                      Nominal Capacity                                     40 Ah ± 5%
                                         Voltage range                                     2.5 V–4.0 V


                            Single-cell measurements were performed using a Maccor 4000 series battery tester
                       with measuring channels having 0 A–150 A current and 0 V–8 V voltage range capabilities.
                       During the measurements, the cells were acclimatized at a constant temperature in a Vötsch
                       VC 7018 climatic chamber for three hours before testing. Since the Maccor measuring
                       system is only designed for voltages up to 8 V, a module measuring station was set up.
                       It consisted of a DC-source sink NL1V80C40 from Höcherl & Hackl (Konzell, Germany),
                       having a voltage range of 0 V to 80 V and current range of −40 A to 40 A for cyclization
                       and a suitable battery management system (BMS) for monitoring each cell’s data with the
                       necessary safety limit switches specific for LFP type batteries. Data acquisition was done
Batteries 2021, 7, 2                                                                                           4 of 13




                       using a high-resolution data logger 34972A from Keysight Technologies (Santa Rosa, CA,
                       USA). All measured data were recorded with a sampling rate of 1 s.

                       2.2. Cell and Module Characterization
                             The measuring procedure was divided into three steps: single-cell characterization,
                       module characterization, and single-cell cycle aging. First, the four LFP cells were individ-
                       ually characterized. As part of the single-cell characterization step, an EIS measurement, a
                       capacity test, a hybrid pulse test, and a measurement of the IC at different currents and
                       temperatures were carried out respectively. Second, the single cells were connected in
                       series for the module measurement. The module characterization step was limited to a ca-
                       pacity measurement and an IC measurement at C/5. Finally, the module was disassembled
                       again and the single cells were aged individually. This procedure, henceforth called the
                       measuring cycle, was repeated four times. All tests were done within single-cell voltage
                       ranges between 2.8 V and 3.7 V at ambient temperature (25 ◦ C).
                             In the results of this article, only the change in capacity and incremental capacity are
                       further evaluated. The details of the considered characterization steps are as follows. The
                       capacity test includes a constant current (CC) charge and discharge cycle at a 1C current
                       rate (40 A) based on the nominal capacity of the battery provided by the supplier. The
                       12 V module characterization is divided into a measurement of the capacity at 1C and the
                       incremental capacity at C/5. The module measurement was stopped as soon as a single
                       cell reached the voltage limits of 2.8 V upon discharge or 3.7 V upon charge. The voltage
                       limits were maintained throughout the testing and were not adjusted for any temperature
                       variations or current rates. The constant current/constant voltage (CC/CV) step was not
                       used in the recharge steps because in CV mode drifting of the cell voltages would occur,
                       which should be avoided. These limits and conditions were chosen in order to mimic the
                       use of a battery in real life applications that is managed by a simple passive balancing
                       voltage-limiting BMS.

                       2.3. Cycle Aging Procedure
                             The aging of batteries depends on many different stress factors, such as the depth of
                       discharge (DOD), the average SOC, the current rate, and the temperature. In this work, the
                       cells were aged using different current rates. Within one aging cycle unit, the cells were
                       charged and discharged at different current rates of 2.5C, 2C, 1.5C, and 1C, respectively.
                       The current rates were chosen to cause fast aging in order to be able to generate significant
                       aging variations in the planned test time. The cells were labeled with the letters A to D
                       (Figure 1). Cell A, with the highest current, could be considered the cell that aged the
                       most and cell D would age the slowest, with the lowest current rate. As the cells A, B,
                       and C heated up to almost 40 ◦ C during discharge, a pause was implemented after each
                       discharge step to enable cooling. The rest periods were adjusted so that the measurements
                       that were performed at the specific current rate end at the same time for all cells studied.
                       The temperature of cell D remained almost constant at 30 ◦ C during the aging sequence, so
                       no pause was inserted between the discharge and the charge step. One aging cycle unit
                       lasted 100 cycles or until a total capacity drop of more than 7 Ah was recorded. The capacity
                       limit was introduced to protect the cell from uncontrolled aging in case of a significant loss
                       of capacity. An overview of the measuring procedure is shown in Figure 1.
Batteries 2021,
Batteries       7, x2 FOR PEER REVIEW
          2021, 7,                                                                                                                                    5 5ofof 13
                                                                                                                                                              13




                                   Figure
                                   Figure 1.
                                           1. Flow
                                              Flow chart
                                                   chart of
                                                         of the
                                                            the measurement procedure.
                                                                                procedure. In
                                                                                           In the
                                                                                               the module
                                                                                                   modulemeasurement
                                                                                                          measurement(orange),
                                                                                                                         (orange),cells
                                                                                                                                   cellsA,A,B,
                                   B, C, and  D were connected   in series. In the other measurements   they were tested  separately.
                                   C, and D were connected in series. In the other measurements they were tested separately.

                                   3. Results
                                   3. Resultsand
                                               andDiscussion
                                                   Discussion
                                         The evaluation
                                             evaluation of                                       ®
                                        The             of the
                                                           the data
                                                               datawas
                                                                    wascarried
                                                                         carriedout
                                                                                  outusing
                                                                                      usingMatLab
                                                                                            MatLab.®.AAfixed
                                                                                                         fixedvoltage
                                                                                                               voltageinterval of
                                                                                                                        interval
                                   5  mV  was used to calculate the single cell IC.
                                   of 5 mV was used to calculate the single cell IC.
                                    3.1. Incremental Capacity
                                   3.1. Incremental Capacity
                                    3.1.1. Origin of IC Peaks
                                   3.1.1. Origin of IC Peaks
                                          An example of the LFP cells’ IC curves and the corresponding voltage curves for both
                                         An example
                                    discharging            of the LFP
                                                    and charging         arecells’
                                                                              shownIC curves
                                                                                        in Figureand2.the
                                                                                                        Thecorresponding
                                                                                                              peaks of interest voltage   curves for
                                                                                                                                     are marked     with both
                                                                                                                                                            the
                                   discharging      and   charging        are  shown     in  Figure   2.  The   peaks     of
                                    numbers 1, 2, and 3. There are two other smaller peaks that can be observed between peak 1interest  are  marked      with
                                   the
                                    andnumbers
                                         2, but they 1, are
                                                        2, and
                                                             not 3.  There
                                                                   clear        are two
                                                                           enough          other smaller
                                                                                      for further             peaksThe
                                                                                                    evaluation.        that   can set
                                                                                                                           same   be of
                                                                                                                                      observed      between
                                                                                                                                         peaks appears       in
                                   peak   1  and   2, but   they   are    not  clear   enough     for further    evaluation.
                                    the charging (positive) and discharging (negative) section of the IC curves, with a slight   The   same    set  of peaksoff-
                                   appears
                                    set alonginthethevoltage
                                                      charging      (positive)
                                                                axis. The      peaksandcorrespond
                                                                                         discharging      (negative)
                                                                                                       to the  phase section
                                                                                                                         equilibriaof the IC curves,
                                                                                                                                      between            with
                                                                                                                                                 individual
                                   agraphite
                                      slight off-set
                                               intercalation stages of the anode, since in the LFP battery the potential curve of be-
                                                        along    the    voltage     axis. The    peaks    correspond       to  the  phase    equilibria     the
                                   tween    individual
                                    iron phosphate electrodegraphite   is intercalation
                                                                           flat because itstages      of the anode,
                                                                                              only belongs                since in the
                                                                                                               to one transition          LFP battery
                                                                                                                                      between              the
                                                                                                                                                    lithiated
                                   potential   curve of the
                                    and a delithiated        phaseiron[23].
                                                                          phosphate      electrode
                                                                               The graphite           is flat because
                                                                                                  intercalation     stages it only   belongs
                                                                                                                              are well         to onein
                                                                                                                                         described       tran-
                                                                                                                                                            the
                                   sition  between      a  lithiated     and    a delithiated      phase   [23].  The    graphite
                                    literature. The first IC peak can be related to the coexistence of pure graphite and graphite    intercalation     stages
                                   are the
                                    of  wellstage
                                              described
                                                     4 phase. in the    literature.
                                                                   Peak 2              The first
                                                                               corresponds       toIC
                                                                                                    thepeak    can be related
                                                                                                         continuing       transitionto the  coexistence
                                                                                                                                        of the   liquid-like of
                                   pure   graphite
                                    phase 2L           andstage
                                                into the      graphite
                                                                    3 phase  of the   stage 4
                                                                                and vice         phase.
                                                                                            versa.   The Peak     2 corresponds
                                                                                                           equilibrium       betweento     the 2 phase
                                                                                                                                        stage   continuing and
                                   transition
                                    stage        of the
                                           1 phase    is liquid-like
                                                         characterized    phaseby 2L
                                                                                   theinto
                                                                                        thirdthe  stage 3
                                                                                                peak        phase
                                                                                                      [24,25].      and vice
                                                                                                                 During          versa. Thethe
                                                                                                                             discharging,      equilibrium
                                                                                                                                                   change in
                                   between
                                    voltage is negative and the peaks in the graph are shifted to lower potentials dueDuring
                                              stage    2 phase     and    stage   1  phase   is characterized      by   the  third  peak   [24,25].     to the
                                   discharging,      the change
                                    overvoltage caused         by the in polarization
                                                                           voltage is negative        andHowever,
                                                                                            resistance.      the peaksininpractical
                                                                                                                               the graph     are shiftedthe
                                                                                                                                         applications,       to
                                   lower   potentials
                                    recharge   step is due
                                                         usually to the     overvoltage
                                                                     used for                caused
                                                                                   IC studies,    sincebythere
                                                                                                            the are
                                                                                                                polarization
                                                                                                                      typically resistance.       However,
                                                                                                                                   sufficiently small      and
                                   in  practical
                                    constant       applications,
                                                current    conditions  the over
                                                                              recharge    step is
                                                                                    a longer        usually
                                                                                                period         used for
                                                                                                          of time           IC studies,
                                                                                                                     [19,20,26].    Hence, since
                                                                                                                                              the there
                                                                                                                                                   resultsarein
                                   typically
                                    this studysufficiently
                                                  consider only small theand     constant
                                                                             charge    IC current
                                                                                          measurements. conditions over a longer period of time
                                   [19,20,26]. Hence, the results in this study consider only the charge IC measurements.
 Batteries 2021, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                          6 of 13
 Batteries 2021, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                           6 of 13
Batteries 2021, 7, 2                                                                                                                           6 of 13




                                       (a)                                                                  (b)
                                        (a)                                                                  (b)
      Figure 2. (a) Charge and discharge voltage curve versus state of charge (b) incremental capacity (IC) curve versus cell
              2.(a)
      Figure2.for
     Figure
      voltage    (a)Charge
                       Charge
                      fresh
                                and
                                 anddischarge
                             lithium  dischargevoltage
                                                voltage
                                      iron phosphate
                                                        curve
                                                         curve
                                                      (LFP)
                                                               versus state
                                                             cellversus
                                                                   cycledstate
                                                                               ofofcharge
                                                                           at C/20  charge
                                                                                    and
                                                                                          (b)                                     versuscell
                                                                                                                            curveversus
                                                                                                                       (IC)curve
                                                                                                             capacity(IC)
                                                                                                 incrementalcapacity
                                                                                            (b)incremental
                                                                                        25 ◦°C.                                          cell
     voltage
      voltagefor
               fora afresh
                       freshlithium
                              lithiumiron
                                       ironphosphate
                                            phosphate(LFP)
                                                       (LFP)cell
                                                              cellcycled
                                                                    cycledatatC/20
                                                                               C/20and
                                                                                     and25
                                                                                         25 C.
                                                                                             °C.
                                     3.1.2. Change in the IC Peaks with Aging
                                      3.1.2. Change in the IC Peaks with Aging
                                    3.1.2. Various
                                            Change in  the IC
                                                    aging     Peaks
                                                           modes      with
                                                                    have     Aging effects on the three analyzable peaks shown in
                                                                          different
                                            Various aging modes have different effects on the three analyzable peaks shown in
                                     Figure   2b. The qualitative   effects
                                          Various aging modes have different of the aging
                                                                                    effectsmodes
                                                                                            on the LAM    at anode (NE)
                                                                                                    three analyzable   peaksand  cathode
                                                                                                                              shown   in
                                      Figure 2b. The qualitative effects of the aging modes LAM at anode (NE) and cathode
                                    FigureLLI
                                     (PE),   2b.and
                                                  TheRI on the IC curves
                                                      qualitative           arethe aging
                                                                    effects of   summarized   in Figure
                                                                                           modes   LAM at 3a–d,  respectively.
                                                                                                            anode (NE)     and They  are
                                                                                                                                cathode
                                      (PE), LLI and RI on the IC curves are summarized in Figure 3a–d, respectively. They are
                                     described
                                    (PE),        in RI
                                           LLI and more  detailICin the
                                                       on the           works
                                                                   curves   are of Dubarry etinal. [3]
                                                                                summarized       Figureand Birkl et al.
                                                                                                         3a–d,          [14]. They are
                                                                                                                respectively.
                                      described in more detail in the works of Dubarry et al. [3] and Birkl et al. [14].
                                    described in more detail in the works of Dubarry et al. [3] and Birkl et al. [14].




                                         (a)                                                              (b)
                                          (a)                                                              (b)




                                         (c)                                                              (d)
                                          (c)                                                              (d)
      Figure3.3.Influence
     Figure       Influenceofof  loss
                              loss      of lithium
                                    of lithium       inventory
                                                 inventory (LLI)(LLI)  (a), resistance
                                                                 (a), resistance         increase
                                                                                  increase  (RI) (b),(RI)
                                                                                                       loss(b), loss of
                                                                                                            of active   active at
                                                                                                                      material  material at anode
                                                                                                                                  anode (LAM  NE )
       Figure
      (LAM  NE
               3.(c),
               )   Influence
                      and lossof
                               of loss
                                   active   lithium at
                                         of material  inventory
                                                        cathode  (LLI)
                                                                 (LAM   (a),
                                                                        PE
                                                                              resistance
                                                                             (d) on the   increase
                                                                                        charge   IC   (RI) (b),
                                                                                                      peaks  of  loss
                                                                                                                 a    of active
                                                                                                                   typical LFP   material at anode
                                                                                                                                cell.
     (c), and loss of active material at cathode (LAMPE ) (d) on the charge IC peaks of a typical LFP cell.
       (LAMNE) (c), and loss of active material at cathode (LAMPE) (d) on the charge IC peaks of a typical LFP cell.
                                          The LLI region, for example, is caused by parasitic reactions such as the formation of
                                     a solid electrolyte interface (SEI). Fewer lithium ions can intercalate into the anode during
Batteries 2021, 7, 2                                                                                                   7 of 13




                       charging, causing a delay in the voltage plateau of the third peak, which is then seen as a
                       decrease in the peak area (Figure 3a). As the third peak disappears, the same reasoning
                       holds for the decrease in the second peak. In the case of LAM, there are basically fewer
                       sites available for lithium ions to intercalate in the active material. Even though all the
                       phase equilibria still occur, but with a lower capacity for each individual process, LAMNE
                       at the anode correspondingly reflects in a decrease of all the peak areas (Figure 3c). In
                       contrast, due to the characteristic flat half-cell potential of the iron phosphate cathode,
                       LAMPE shows no effect on the IC peaks, provided that the anode is the electrode that is
                       limiting the capacity of the battery. If this was not the case, when the capacity of the anode
                       is greater than that of the cathode, LAMPE would cause the anode to be “less filled” with
                       lithium ions, which leads to a reduction in the third peak only. Consequently, the LAM
                       at the cathode shows either a decrease of the third peak or does not show any change at
                       all (Figure 3d). It is important to note that this is a special behavior of the iron phosphate
                       electrode and does not apply to all Li-ion cell-type chemistries. The increase in polarization
                       resistance has no effect on the area of the peaks. RI shifts the charge IC curves towards
                       higher potentials (Figure 3b). As the polarization resistance depends on the SOC, this shift
                       does not have to be symmetrical.

                       3.2. ICA for Battery Modules with Series-Connected Cells
                            ICA has already proven to be a powerful tool for SOH determination of single cells
                       and modules with parallel connected cells [4,10,15,20]. The following section examines the
                       IC curve evaluation for a module consisting of cells connected in series.

                       3.2.1. Analytical Consideration of the Module IC
                            The incremental capacity is determined for each cell k = 1, . . . , n, k ∈ N, at time t by
                       the quotient of the difference of two capacity measurements ∆Qt = Qt − Qt − 1 , and the
                       difference of two voltage measurements ∆Vt = Vt − Vt − 1 (see Equation (1)). According to
                       Kirchhoff’s laws, the changes in capacity for series-connected cells over a period of time
                       are identical: ∆Qt,1 = . . . = ∆Qt,n . It can therefore be considered that

                                                      ∆Vt ,j 6= ∆Vt ,k     | unequal SOH,                                 (2)

                                                        ∆Vt ,j = ∆Vt ,k     | equal SOH,                                  (3)
                       is valid for the cells with indices j = 1, . . . , n and k 6= j. Since the voltages of the batteries in
                       the series connection add up to the module voltage Vt,M , the incremental capacity of the
                       module M with n cells connected in series satisfies:
                                                     ∆Qt      ∆Qt     equal SOH   ∆Qt
                                                          = n             =             .                                 (4)
                                                    ∆Vt,M  ∑ k =1 ∆Vt           n × ∆Vt

                            This means that the module IC is n times smaller than the incremental capacity of the
                       individual cells, while the cells have the same SOH. The mean value x of the incremental
                       capacity of the individual cells with the single cell voltage Vt,S is
                                                                  ∆Q
                                                          ∑nk=1 ∆Vt,kt equal SOH n × ∆Qt
                                                     xS =                  =               .                              (5)
                                                              n                  n × ∆Vt,S

                             To allow for direct comparison, the incremental capacity of the module is scaled to
                       that of the single-cell IC. For this purpose, the module IC is multiplied by the number of
                       cells. In the case of cells that have an equal SOH, the result is as follows:

                                                                 ∆Qt equal SOH ∆Qt
                                                           n×            =           .                                    (6)
                                                                ∆Vt,M          ∆Vt,S
Batteries 2021, 7, 2                                                                                                                    8 of 13

Batteries 2021, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                   8 of 13


                                        For cells of the same SOH, the scaled IC of the module corresponds to the incremental
                                  capacity of the individual cells. In the case of equal cell capacity, the development of
                                  single-cell voltages over time can be assumed to be identical. Hence, the correlation be-
                                  the single-cell voltages over time can be assumed to be identical. Hence, the correlation
                                  tween the single-cell mean value and scaled module IC is also valid when plotting the
                                  between the single-cell mean value and scaled module IC is also valid when plotting the
                                  incremental capacity as a function of voltage, as long as the cells have the same SOH. If
                                  incremental capacity as a function of voltage, as long as the cells have the same SOH. If the
                                  the cells have not aged equally, the mean value of the single cell IC no longer corresponds
                                  cells have not aged equally, the mean value of the single cell IC no longer corresponds to
                                  to the module IC and the difference or imbalance is then an indication that there are cells
                                  the module IC and the difference or imbalance is then an indication that there are cells at
                                  at different SOH (Equations (4) and (5)).
                                  different SOH (Equations (4) and (5)).
                                  3.2.2.
                                  3.2.2. Experimental
                                          Experimental Results:
                                                          Results: Influence
                                                                     Influence ofof SOH
                                                                                    SOH Uniformity
                                                                                          Uniformity on
                                                                                                      on Applying
                                                                                                          Applying ICA ICA toto aa Module
                                                                                                                                   Module
                                        To validate
                                        To   validate the
                                                       the results
                                                           results of
                                                                    of the
                                                                        the analytical
                                                                             analytical investigation
                                                                                        investigation for
                                                                                                       for cells
                                                                                                            cells of
                                                                                                                   of the
                                                                                                                      the same
                                                                                                                           same SOH,
                                                                                                                                   SOH, the
                                                                                                                                         the
                                  experimental data
                                  experimental      datafrom
                                                         fromthe themodule
                                                                      module    characterization
                                                                              characterization     of the
                                                                                               of the firstfirst  measuring
                                                                                                            measuring     cyclecycle
                                                                                                                                 were were
                                                                                                                                       used.
                                  used.new
                                  The     TheLFP
                                               newcells
                                                     LFPhadcellscapacities
                                                                 had capacities    that varied
                                                                            that varied         between
                                                                                          between   43.2 Ah43.2  Ah44.3
                                                                                                               and    andAh.
                                                                                                                           44.3Thus,
                                                                                                                                  Ah. Thus,
                                                                                                                                       they
                                  they   all had  a similar  SOH,    with  a  maximum     capacity  deviation
                                  all had a similar SOH, with a maximum capacity deviation of 2.5%. The change   of 2.5%.   The   change   in
                                                                                                                                    in their
                                  their  respective   capacities  over   the four  measuring   cycle units  is illustrated
                                  respective capacities over the four measuring cycle units is illustrated in Figure 4.     in Figure   4.




                                  Figure 4. Capacity of the individual cells plotted over the four life cycle units.

                                        Figure 55 shows
                                        Figure    shows thethe overlay
                                                                overlay of
                                                                         of the
                                                                             the single
                                                                                 single cells’
                                                                                         cells’ IC
                                                                                                 IC and
                                                                                                     and module’s
                                                                                                          module’s IC  IC for
                                                                                                                          for the
                                                                                                                              the first
                                                                                                                                  first cycle
                                                                                                                                        cycle
                                  unit. Since
                                  unit.  Sincethe
                                                themodule
                                                     module     voltage
                                                              voltage  in in
                                                                          thethe   series
                                                                               series     connection
                                                                                       connection         resulted
                                                                                                      resulted  fromfrom
                                                                                                                       the the  sum
                                                                                                                           sum of   theofindi-
                                                                                                                                           the
                                  individual  voltages,   the  voltage  interval  for the calculation    of the incremental
                                  vidual voltages, the voltage interval for the calculation of the incremental capacity was setcapacity   was
                                      tomV,
                                  set20
                                  to     20 mV,
                                             fourfour  times
                                                   times       larger
                                                           larger  thanthan
                                                                         for for
                                                                              the the single
                                                                                  single       cells.
                                                                                          cells.  To allow   for afor
                                                                                                       To allow       a direct
                                                                                                                    direct     comparison,
                                                                                                                           comparison,     the
                                  module’s IC curve was scaled as described in the previous section by multiplying thethe
                                  the module’s    IC curve   was   scaled  as  described   in the  previous   section   by multiplying      in-
                                  incremental
                                  cremental      capacity
                                              capacity  byby thethe  number
                                                                 number         of individual
                                                                            of individual    cellscells in module.
                                                                                                   in the  the module.     In addition,
                                                                                                                      In addition,         the
                                                                                                                                    the volt-
                                  voltage
                                  age overover
                                            whichwhich   thewas
                                                    the IC    IC was   determined
                                                                  determined     waswas     divided
                                                                                       divided         by four.
                                                                                                  by four.
                                        The resolution of the voltage measurement that was determined directly from the BMS
                                  was relatively noisy, with fluctuations of up to 6 mV. For this reason, the measurement data
                                  obtained from BMSs are typically smoothed before further evaluation. Despite the noise,
                                  the results show that the IC curves of the individual cells and the module superimpose
                                  reasonably well. Hence, the resulting comparison, as expressed in Equation (6), was
                                  confirmed by the experimental analysis. The single cells’ and scaled module’s IC curves
                                  match well if the series-connected cells have a similar SOH. Therefore, in this case the
                                  module’s SOH can then be evaluated using single-cell correlations of the FOI with the SOH.
                                       Figure 5 shows the overlay of the single cells’ IC and module’s IC for the first cycle
                                  unit. Since the module voltage in the series connection resulted from the sum of the indi-
                                  vidual voltages, the voltage interval for the calculation of the incremental capacity was set
                                  to 20 mV, four times larger than for the single cells. To allow for a direct comparison, the
                                  module’s IC curve was scaled as described in the previous section by multiplying the in-
Batteries 2021, 7, 2                                                                                                     9 of 13
                                  cremental capacity by the number of individual cells in the module. In addition, the volt-
                                  age over which the IC was determined was divided by four.


Batteries 2021, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                        9 of 13




                                  Figure 5. Single cells’ and scaled module’s IC graphs of the first cycle unit measured by the battery
                                  management system (BMS).

                                        The resolution of the voltage measurement that was determined directly from the
                                  BMS was relatively noisy, with fluctuations of up to 6 mV. For this reason, the measure-
                                  ment data obtained from BMSs are typically smoothed before further evaluation. Despite
                                  the noise, the results show that the IC curves of the individual cells and the module su-
                                  perimpose reasonably well. Hence, the resulting comparison, as expressed in Equation
                                  (6), was confirmed by the experimental analysis. The single cells’ and scaled module’s IC
                                  curves match well if the series-connected cells have a similar SOH. Therefore, in this case
                                  the module’s SOH can then be evaluated using single-cell correlations of the FOI with the
                                  Figure 5. Single cells’ and scaled module’s IC graphs of the first cycle unit measured by the battery
                                  SOH.
                                  management system (BMS).
                                  3.2.3.
                                  3.2.3. Experimental
                                         Experimental Results:
                                                          Results: Influence
                                                                    Influence ofof SOH
                                                                                   SOH Non-Uniformity
                                                                                         Non-Uniformity on    on Applying
                                                                                                                  Applying ICA
                                                                                                                             ICA toto a
                                  Module
                                  a Module
                                        To
                                        To investigate
                                            investigate the
                                                          theinfluence
                                                              influenceofofSOHSOHvariations
                                                                                     variations within
                                                                                                  within thethe
                                                                                                              group
                                                                                                                groupof of
                                                                                                                        single  cells
                                                                                                                           single     in se-
                                                                                                                                    cells in
                                  ries onon
                                  series   thethe
                                                module’s
                                                   module’sincremental
                                                              incremental capacity,   thethe
                                                                              capacity,   IC IC
                                                                                              curves
                                                                                                 curvesof of
                                                                                                           thethe
                                                                                                                module
                                                                                                                  module of of
                                                                                                                            thethe
                                                                                                                                 second
                                                                                                                                    secondto
                                  thethe
                                  to   fourth
                                          fourthcycle unit
                                                  cycle     were
                                                         unit wereanalyzed.
                                                                     analyzed.During
                                                                                 Duringaging
                                                                                           agingininthe
                                                                                                     theindividual
                                                                                                          individual measuring
                                                                                                                       measuring cycles,
                                                                                                                                     cycles,
                                  differences
                                  differences in capacity between the cells became larger (Figure 4). The resulting  resulting variations
                                  in
                                  in module
                                     module measurement of the second measuring cycle unit can be seen in Figure 6. Since
                                  the
                                  the focus
                                       focus ofofthis
                                                  thiswork
                                                       workwaswasnotnotononthe post-processing
                                                                             the  post-processing  of of
                                                                                                      online   data,
                                                                                                          online     these
                                                                                                                  data,     datadata
                                                                                                                         these    were   ac-
                                                                                                                                       were
                                  quired
                                  acquired with
                                             witha a
                                                   high-resolution
                                                      high-resolution multi-meter
                                                                        multi-meter andandareare
                                                                                              therefore
                                                                                                 therefore free ofof
                                                                                                             free  measurement
                                                                                                                     measurement   noise.
                                                                                                                                      noise.




                                  Figure
                                  Figure 6.
                                         6. Single-cell
                                            Single-cell and
                                                        and scaled
                                                            scaled module
                                                                   module IC
                                                                          IC in
                                                                             in the
                                                                                the second
                                                                                    second measuring
                                                                                           measuring cycle
                                                                                                     cycle unit.
                                                                                                           unit.

                                        Examining the
                                        Examining      theICICcurve
                                                                  curveofofthethemodule
                                                                                   module     only,
                                                                                            only,    the
                                                                                                   the    results
                                                                                                       results    show
                                                                                                               show      that
                                                                                                                      that thethe
                                                                                                                                firstfirst
                                                                                                                                       peak peak  in
                                                                                                                                              in the
                                  the  module
                                  module          curve
                                             curve is  nois no
                                                           longer longer
                                                                     clearlyclearly  distinguishable.
                                                                                distinguishable.           Comparing
                                                                                                     Comparing     the the   overlaying
                                                                                                                       overlaying     singlesingle
                                                                                                                                               cells’
                                  cells’
                                  IC      IC curves,
                                     curves,   the firstthe  firstispeak
                                                          peak              is only observed
                                                                     only observed       for cells for cells
                                                                                                   A and   B.A  and B. However,
                                                                                                              However,   the peak isthe  nopeak
                                                                                                                                             longeris
                                  no  longer   visible   for  cells  C   and   D  and   therefore   is not  detectable  in the
                                  visible for cells C and D and therefore is not detectable in the IC curve of the module. Note IC   curve    of the
                                  module.
                                  that  cells Note
                                              A andthat    cells
                                                       B are    theAones
                                                                       and that
                                                                             B arehad
                                                                                    theaged
                                                                                          onesthe
                                                                                                thatmost
                                                                                                      had after
                                                                                                            agedthe
                                                                                                                  thefirst
                                                                                                                      mosttwoafter  the first
                                                                                                                                 aging    cycletwo
                                                                                                                                                 se-
                                  aging
                                  quences cycle  sequences
                                             (Figure   4). This(Figure
                                                                  behavior4). This  behavior
                                                                               cannot           cannot be
                                                                                        be explained        explained
                                                                                                        by the         byathe
                                                                                                                aging of       aging
                                                                                                                            single       of a
                                                                                                                                      cell    single
                                                                                                                                           (Section
                                  cell (Section
                                  3.1.2),  but is 3.1.2),
                                                  relatedbutto isthe
                                                                   related
                                                                      SOC to of the
                                                                                 the SOC
                                                                                     cells of the cells
                                                                                             during  theduring   the sequence
                                                                                                          charging   charging of sequence
                                                                                                                                     the      of the
                                                                                                                                           module.
                                  module.     Since  the   module      is discharged      before  charging,   the  weakest
                                  Since the module is discharged before charging, the weakest cell A reaches the final dis-  cell  A   reaches   the
                                  final discharge
                                  charge             voltage
                                            voltage first   andfirst
                                                                   thus and  thusthe
                                                                          stops    stops    the measurement
                                                                                       measurement               and determines
                                                                                                         and determines               the capacity
                                                                                                                            the capacity      of the
                                  of the   module.     At  this   point   in  time,   the  remaining    cells have   higher
                                  module. At this point in time, the remaining cells have higher cell voltages and therefore  cell voltages     and
                                  are at a higher SOC, depending on their individual SOH. This effect became even more
                                  prominent after the cells were subjected to four aging cycle sequences. In particular, cell
                                  A achieved only around 23 Ah in discharge capacity in the fourth cycle unit. To illustrate
                                  this process, the development of the individual cell voltages during a charge cycle within
Batteries 2021, 7, 2                                                                                                                                 10 of 13




                                  therefore are at a higher SOC, depending on their individual SOH. This effect became
Batteries 2021, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                  10 of 13
                                  even more prominent after the cells were subjected to four aging cycle sequences. In
                                  particular, cell A achieved only around 23 Ah in discharge capacity in the fourth cycle
                                  unit. To illustrate this process, the development of the individual cell voltages during
                                  thecharge
                                  a   module   over
                                            cycle    the first
                                                   within  the(new)
                                                               moduleandover
                                                                         the the
                                                                             fourth (aged)
                                                                                 first     module
                                                                                       (new) and theICfourth
                                                                                                       measurements
                                                                                                             (aged) are com-
                                                                                                                   module  IC
                                  measurements
                                  pared  and shown arein Figure
                                                       compared 7. and shown in Figure 7.




                                  Figure
                                  Figure 7.
                                         7. Distribution
                                             Distribution ofof the
                                                                the cell
                                                                    cellvoltages
                                                                         voltagesof
                                                                                 ofthe
                                                                                     themodule
                                                                                         moduleIC ICmeasurements
                                                                                                     measurementsduring
                                                                                                                  duringaaC/5
                                                                                                                           C/5charge
                                                                                                                               chargefor
                                                                                                                                       for
                                  new
                                  new cells
                                       cells in
                                             in the
                                                the first
                                                    first cycle
                                                          cycle unit
                                                                 unit and
                                                                      and aged
                                                                           aged cells
                                                                                cells in
                                                                                      in the
                                                                                         the fourth cycle unit.
                                                                                             fourth cycle unit.

                                        AA module
                                           module withwith four new cells shows a reasonably good distribution of the voltages
                                  over the
                                  over   the charge
                                             charge for allall the
                                                               the cells
                                                                    cells (cycle
                                                                           (cycle unit
                                                                                    unit 11 inin Figure
                                                                                                   Figure 7).7). In
                                                                                                                  Inthe
                                                                                                                     thefirst
                                                                                                                           firstmodule
                                                                                                                                 modulemeasurement,
                                                                                                                                              measurement,
                                  the cell
                                  the  cell voltages
                                            voltagesatatthe thebeginning
                                                                 beginningofofcharging
                                                                                     charging    are are  noticeably
                                                                                                        noticeably         higher
                                                                                                                       higher    thanthanthethe   lower
                                                                                                                                               lower      cut-
                                                                                                                                                      cut-off
                                  off voltage    (2.8  V), which    might     be   due    to  a  longer     relaxation      time
                                  voltage (2.8 V), which might be due to a longer relaxation time in the first module’s meas-      in  the   first module’s
                                  measuring
                                  uring   cycle.cycle.  Cell
                                                   Cell A   wasA was
                                                                  the the   limiting
                                                                       limiting     cell,cell,  triggering
                                                                                            triggering      thethe   BMStototerminate
                                                                                                                   BMS         terminatethe    the discharge
                                                                                                                                                   discharge
                                  when it reached the lower cut-off voltage. Upon recharging, the cell D reached the upper
                                  voltage limit first, thereby stopping the charging process. In cycle four, in which the cells
                                  had significantly
                                  had   significantly aged, cell A reached the lower cut-off voltage a lot sooner. The other cells
                                  maintained
                                  maintained at   at relatively
                                                     relatively high
                                                                  high cell
                                                                         cell voltages,
                                                                               voltages, showing
                                                                                              showing that  that they
                                                                                                                   they had
                                                                                                                          had limited
                                                                                                                                limited their
                                                                                                                                           their discharge
                                                                                                                                                   discharge
                                  capacity.   Upon     recharging,    cell  D   again    reached        the  upper    cell
                                  capacity. Upon recharging, cell D again reached the upper cell voltage limit a lot sooner, voltage    limit   a lot sooner,
                                  thereby   terminating      the charging     process      and    limiting    the   recharge
                                  thereby terminating the charging process and limiting the recharge conditions of the other     conditions      of the other
                                  cells in
                                  cells  inthe
                                            themodule,
                                                  module,including
                                                              including  thethe   limited
                                                                               limited         recharging
                                                                                           recharging       of of    cellinA in
                                                                                                                cell A            particular.
                                                                                                                             particular.    The BMSThe used
                                                                                                                                                        BMS
                                  usedahad a
                                  had           passive
                                           passive         charge
                                                      charge         controller
                                                                controller     thatthat
                                                                                      wouldwould       balance
                                                                                                   balance     thethecell
                                                                                                                       cellvoltages
                                                                                                                             voltagesduring
                                                                                                                                          during charging
                                                                                                                                                    charging
                                  through discharging
                                  through    dischargingthe   thecell
                                                                   cellwith
                                                                         with thethe
                                                                                   highest
                                                                                       highest SOC   SOCby connecting
                                                                                                            by connecting   a resistor    in parallel.
                                                                                                                                  a resistor            Since
                                                                                                                                                 in parallel.
                                  the  balancing     process   in this  study    was   not    relevant,     it was    deactivated
                                  Since the balancing process in this study was not relevant, it was deactivated in the BMS.            in the   BMS.
                                         Due to
                                        Due   to the
                                                   the different
                                                        different SOC
                                                                   SOC values
                                                                           values of  of the
                                                                                           the cells,
                                                                                                 cells, the
                                                                                                          the IC
                                                                                                               IC single-cell       peaks were
                                                                                                                    single-cell peaks         were broadly
                                                                                                                                                     broadly
                                  distributed    at  different  time   periods,     as shown        in  Figure    8a. The    result
                                  distributed at different time periods, as shown in Figure 8a. The result is a deformation of        is a  deformation    of
                                  the  module     IC  plotted   against   time    and   voltage
                                  the module IC plotted against time and voltage (Figure 8).          (Figure    8).
                                         The module IC peaks are dependent on the SOH and SOC of each cell in the series
                                  connection and are no longer attributable only to the chemistry changes and FOI of the
                                  individual cells. This means that single-cell correlations cannot be applied to the module
                                  if the single cells differ in their SOH significantly. In the example under consideration, it
                                  is therefore not possible to infer the SOH of individual cells or the module from only the
                                  module measurement or vice versa. However, the deformation effect of the IC graphs for a
                                  module can be used to identify whether there are cells within the module that are aging
                                  differently in relation to each other, thereby giving a qualitative indication that changes
                                  between certain cells within the module have occurred. In an application, the BMS can
                                  monitor the module IC curve and, for example, regulate the aging of the weakest cell
                                  through active balancing as soon as the module IC deviates from the behavior of a single
                                  cell. The weakest cell would not have to be identified until the module IC deviates from

                                       (a)                                                                    (b)
       Figure 8. IC curves of the module measurement in the fourth measuring cycle unit plotted over time (a) and voltage (b).
                                 Figure 7. Distribution of the cell voltages of the module IC measurements during a C/5 charge for
                                 new cells in the first cycle unit and aged cells in the fourth cycle unit.

Batteries 2021, 7, 2                   A module with four new cells shows a reasonably good distribution of the 11           voltages
                                                                                                                                  of 13
                                 over the charge for all the cells (cycle unit 1 in Figure 7). In the first module measurement,
                                 the cell voltages at the beginning of charging are noticeably higher than the lower cut-off
                                 voltage (2.8 V), which might be due to a longer relaxation time in the first module’s meas-
                                  the single cell IC significantly and in a predetermined order. In the case of investigating
                                 uring cycle. Cell A was the limiting cell, triggering the BMS to terminate the discharge
                                  LFP cell chemistry, the first module peak would be a suitable measurement for this type of
                                 when it reached the lower cut-off voltage. Upon recharging, the cell D reached the upper
                                  analysis. Subsequently, the success of the BMS control can be measured by the renewed
                                 voltage limit first, thereby stopping the charging process. In cycle four, in which the cells
                                  formation of the first module peak. Since the evaluation of parallel connected cells is
                                 had significantly aged, cell A reached the lower cut-off voltage a lot sooner. The other cells
                                  possible [10,20], this method can also be applied to series-connected packs of parallel
                                 maintained at relatively high cell voltages, showing that they had limited their discharge
                                  connected cells. Furthermore, this method is also well suited for classifying modules based
                                 capacity. Upon recharging, cell D again reached the upper cell voltage limit a lot sooner,
                                  on terminal measurements without needing to have access to individual cell data. In
                                 thereby terminating the charging process and limiting the recharge conditions of the other
                                  addition, measuring time would be saved since only a partial measurement of the first
                                 cells in the module, including the limited recharging of cell A in particular. The BMS used
                                  module peak is needed for this type of characterization. This offers a promising approach
                                 had a passive charge controller that would balance the cell voltages during charging
                                  for the initial classification of second life modules, which in future will increasingly have to
                                 through    discharging
                                  be transferred   to new the  cell
                                                           types  of with  the highest
                                                                     applications, suchSOC    bystorage
                                                                                        as grid  connecting   a resistor
                                                                                                        systems.          in parallel.
                                                                                                                  The quantification
                                 Since  the balancing    process  in this study  was not  relevant, it was deactivated
                                  of the SOH of a module would still have to be done by the evaluation of the weakest    in the BMS.
                                                                                                                                  cell
                                       Due   to the  different  SOC   values  of the cells, the IC single-cell peaks  were
                                  within the module, for example, by measuring the changes in the IC curves’ peaks relative  broadly
                                 distributed   at different time periods, as shown in Figure 8a. The result is a deformation of
                                  to a new cell.
                                 the module IC plotted against time and voltage (Figure 8).




                                   (a)                                                          (b)
       Figure
        Figure8.8.IC
                   ICcurves
                      curvesof
                             ofthe
                                themodule
                                   modulemeasurement
                                          measurementin
                                                      inthe
                                                         thefourth
                                                             fourthmeasuring
                                                                   measuring cycle
                                                                             cycle unit
                                                                                   unit plotted
                                                                                        plotted over
                                                                                                over time
                                                                                                      time (a)
                                                                                                           (a) and
                                                                                                               and voltage
                                                                                                                   voltage (b).
                                                                                                                           (b).


                                  3.3. Future Work
                                        The changes of the FOI with aging are determined by the different aging modes
                                  that occur in the respective cells. These in turn depend on cell chemistry, cell geometry,
                                  and the operating stress factors. In order to avoid or reduce the extensive experimental
                                  investigations that are necessary to determine the interrelationships of the FOI with the
                                  cell SOH under certain aging conditions, the method in the future should be linked to
                                  aging models to predict the change in the FOI of a single cell. Based on this, a module
                                  model can be used to simulate the effect of different single-cell SOH on the module’s ICA.
                                  The model results can provide reference values for the evaluation of the IC of different
                                  module configurations in applications. Furthermore, a frequent adjustment of the FOI
                                  correlation with the SOH based on the actual stress on the battery is conceivable. In the
                                  development of a suitable aging model, it is important to ensure that the method of model
                                  parameterization is efficient, cost-effective, and minimally complex. This will form part of
                                  ongoing work.

                                  4. Conclusions
                                       The ICA is a simple and versatile method and thus represents a promising approach
                                  for SOH estimation in Li-ion battery modules. This study focused on the implementation
                                  of ICA as a SOH-monitoring method for modules, including series-connected cells or
                                  packs. For this purpose, the extension of single-cell analysis to multi-cell battery modules
                                  was discussed. The investigations were based on extensive experimental studies on LFP
                                  batteries. Thereby different single-cell aging states were induced by cyclization with
                                  different current rates. The results showed that the capacity loss of battery modules can
Batteries 2021, 7, 2                                                                                                                  12 of 13




                                   be determined from the single-cell IC data, provided that the single cells have a similar
                                   SOH. In the case of significant SOH deviations, a method to identify the different aging
                                   of single cells based on terminal data from the first module IC peak was presented. This
                                   method offers the possibility of saving computing capacity in the BMS and can be used
                                   for the initial classification of second life modules. In order to be able to flexibly use the
                                   method in various online applications, we intend to perform further research on modeling
                                   the temperature and aging dependence of ICA.

                                   Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.K., E.F., F.S., and C.A.; data curation, A.K., E.F., and
                                   K.D.; formal analysis, A.K.; investigation, A.K., E.F., and K.D.; methodology, A.K.; resources, F.S.;
                                   software, A.K.; supervision, E.F., K.D., and C.A.; validation, A.K.; visualization, A.K.; writing—
                                   original draft, A.K.; writing—review and editing, E.F., K.D., F.S., and C.A. All authors have read and
                                   agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                   Funding: This research received no external funding.
                                   Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
                                   corresponding author.
                                   Acknowledgments: The authors thank the Hanse Wissenschaft Kolleg (HWK), the center for ad-
                                   vanced studies in Delmenhorst Germany, for their financial contribution towards the fellowship of
                                   E. Ferg.
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Scrosati, B.; Garche, J. Lithium batteries: Status, prospects and future. J. Power Sources 2010, 195, 2419–2430. [CrossRef]
2.    Malhotra, A.; Battke, B.; Beuse, M.; Stephan, A.; Schmidt, T.S. Use cases for stationary battery technologies: A review of the
      literature and existing projects. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2016, 56, 705–721. [CrossRef]
3.    Dubarry, M.; Truchot, C.; Liaw, B.Y. Synthesize battery degradation modes via a diagnostic and prognostic model. J. Power Sources
      2012, 219, 204–216. [CrossRef]
4.    Li, Y.; Abdel-Monem, M.; Gopalakrishnan, R.; Berecibar, M.; Nanini-Maury, E.; Omar, N.; Bossche, P.V.D.; Van Mierlo, J. A quick
      on-line state of health estimation method for Li-ion battery with incremental capacity curves processed by Gaussian filter. J. Power
      Sources 2018, 373, 40–53. [CrossRef]
5.    Berecibar, M.; Gandiaga, I.; Villarreal, I.; Omar, N.; Van Mierlo, J.; Bossche, P.V.D. Critical review of state of health estimation
      methods of Li-ion batteries for real applications. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2016, 56, 572–587. [CrossRef]
6.    Casals, L.C.; García, B.A.; Canal, C. Second life batteries lifespan: Rest of useful life and environmental analysis. J. Environ. Manag.
      2019, 232, 354–363. [CrossRef]
7.    Han, X.; Ouyang, M.; Lu, L.; Li, J.; Zheng, Y.; Li, Z. A comparative study of commercial lithium ion battery cycle life in electrical
      vehicle: Aging mechanism identification. J. Power Sources 2014, 251, 38–54. [CrossRef]
8.    Zheng, L.; Zhu, J.; Lu, D.D.-C.; Wang, G.; He, T. Incremental capacity analysis and differential voltage analysis based state of
      charge and capacity estimation for lithium-ion batteries. Energy 2018, 150, 759–769. [CrossRef]
9.    Riviere, E.; Sari, A.; Venet, P.; Meniere, F.; Bultel, Y. Innovative Incremental Capacity Analysis Implementation for C/LiFePO4
      Cell State-of-Health Estimation in Electrical Vehicles. Batteries 2019, 5, 37. [CrossRef]
10.   Weng, C.; Feng, X.; Sun, J.; Peng, H. State-of-health monitoring of lithium-ion battery modules and packs via incremental capacity
      peak tracking. Appl. Energy 2016, 180, 360–368. [CrossRef]
11.   Han, X.; Ouyang, M.; Lu, L.; Li, J. Cycle Life of Commercial Lithium-Ion Batteries with Lithium Titanium Oxide Anodes in
      Electric Vehicles. Energies 2014, 7, 4895–4909. [CrossRef]
12.   Berecibar, M.; Dubarry, M.; Omar, N.; Villarreal, I.; Van Mierlo, J. Degradation Mechanism Detection for NMC Batteries based on
      Incremental Capacity Curves. World Electr. Veh. J. 2016, 8, 350–361. [CrossRef]
13.   Dubarry, M.; Baure, G.; Devie, A. Durability and Reliability of EV Batteries under Electric Utility Grid Operations: Path
      Dependence of Battery Degradation. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2018, 165, A773–A783. [CrossRef]
14.   Birkl, C.R.; Roberts, M.R.; McTurk, E.; Bruce, P.G.; Howey, D.A. Degradation diagnostics for lithium ion cells. J. Power Sources
      2017, 341, 373–386. [CrossRef]
15.   Wang, L.; Pan, C.; Liu, L.; Cheng, Y.; Zhao, X. On-board state of health estimation of LiFePO4 battery pack through differential
      voltage analysis. Appl. Energy 2016, 168, 465–472. [CrossRef]
16.   Lin, C.P.; Cabrera, J.; Yu, D.Y.W.; Yang, F.; Tsui, K.L. SOH Estimation and SOC Recalibration of Lithium-Ion Battery with
      Incremental Capacity Analysis & Cubic Smoothing Spline. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2020, 167, 090537. [CrossRef]
17.   Dubarry, M.; Liaw, B.; Chen, M.-S.; Chyan, S.-S.; Han, K.-C.; Sie, W.-T.; Wu, S.H. Identifying battery aging mechanisms in large
      format Li ion cells. J. Power Sources 2011, 196, 3420–3425. [CrossRef]
Batteries 2021, 7, 2                                                                                                               13 of 13




18.   Weng, C.; Sun, J.; Peng, H. A unified open-circuit-voltage model of lithium-ion batteries for state-of-charge estimation and
      state-of-health monitoring. J. Power Sources 2014, 258, 228–237. [CrossRef]
19.   Weng, C.; Cui, Y.; Sun, J.; Peng, H. On-board state of health monitoring of lithium-ion batteries using incremental capacity
      analysis with support vector regression. J. Power Sources 2013, 235, 36–44. [CrossRef]
20.   Jiang, Y.; Jiang, J.; Zhang, C.; Zhang, W.; Gao, Y.; Guo, Q. Recognition of battery aging variations for LiFePO4 batteries in 2nd use
      applications combining incremental capacity analysis and statistical approaches. J. Power Sources 2017, 360, 180–188. [CrossRef]
21.   Lee, H.; Park, J.; Kim, J. Incremental Capacity Curve Peak Points-Based Regression Analysis for the State-of-Health Prediction of
      a Retired LiNiCoAlO2 Series/Parallel Configured Battery Pack. Electronics 2019, 8, 1118. [CrossRef]
22.   Kalogiannis, T.; Stroe, D.I.; Nyborg, J.; Nørregaard, K.; Christensen, A.E.; Schaltz, E. Incremental Capacity Analysis of a
      Lithium-Ion Battery Pack for Different Charging Rates. ECS Trans. 2017, 77, 403–412. [CrossRef]
23.   Hou, P.; Chu, G.; Gao, J.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, L. Li-ion batteries: Phase transition. Chin. Phys. B 2016, 25, 016104. [CrossRef]
24.   Ohzuku, T.; Iwakoshi, Y.; Sawai, K. Formation of Lithium-Graphite Intercalation Compounds in Nonaqueous Electrolytes and
      Their Application as a Negative Electrode for a Lithium Ion (Shuttlecock) Cell. J. Electrochem. Soc. 1993, 140, 2490–2498. [CrossRef]
25.   Dahn, J.R. Phase diagram ofLixC6. Phys. Rev. B 1991, 44, 9170–9177. [CrossRef]
26.   Wang, Z.; Ma, J.; Zhang, L. State-of-Health Estimation for Lithium-Ion Batteries Based on the Multi-Island Genetic Algorithm and
      the Gaussian Process Regression. IEEE Access 2017, 5, 21286–21295. [CrossRef]
